CHAPTER XIX. 

THE GTJLF STREAM. 

THIS terrible scene of the 20th of April none of us can 
ever forget. I have written it under the influence of 
violent emotion. Since then I have revised the recital; I 
have read it to Conseil and to the Canadian. They found 
it exact as to facts, but insufficient as to effect. To paint 
such pictures, one must have the pen of the most illus- 
trious of our poets, the author of "The Toilers of the 
Deep." 

I have said that Captain Nemo wept while watching 
the waves; his grief was great. It was the second com- 
panion he had lost since our arrival on board, and what a 
death! That friend, crushed, stifled, bruised by the 
dreadful arms of a poulp, pounded by his iron jaws, would 
not rest with his comrades in the peaceful coral cemetery! 
In the midst of this struggle, it was the despairing cry 
uttered by the unfortunate man that had torn my heart. 
The poor Frenchman, forgetting his conventional lan- 
guage, had taken to his own mother tongue, to utter 9 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 26? 

last; appeal! Amongst the crew of the Nautilus, associated 
witli the body and soul of the captain, recoiling like him 
from all contact with men, I had a fellow-countryman. 
Did he alone represent France in this mysterious asso- 
ciation, evidently composed of individuals of divers 
nationalities? It. was one of these insoluble problems that 
rosje up unceasingly before my mind! 

Captain Nemo entered his room, and I saw him no more 
for some time. But that he was sad and irresolute I could 
see by the vessel, of which he was the soul, and which re- 
ceived all his impressions. The Nautilus did not keep on 
in its settled course; it floated about like a corpse at the 
will of the waves. It went at random. He could not tear 
himself away from the scene of the last struggle, from this 
sea that had devoured one of his men. Ten days passed 
thus. It was not till the 1st of May that the Nautilus re- 
sumed its northerly course, after having sighted the Ba- 
hamas at the mouth of the Bahama Canal. We were then 
following the current from the largest river to the sea, that 
has its banks, its fish, and its proper temperatures. I mean 
the Gulf Stream. It is really a river, that flows freely to 
the middle of the Atlantic, and whose waters do not mix 
with the ocean waters. It is a salt river, salter than the 
surrounding sea. Its mean depth is 1,500 fathoms, its 
mean breadth is ten miles. In certain places the current 
flows with the speed of two miles and a half an hour. The 
body of its waters is more considerable than that of all the 
rivers on the globe. It was on this ocean river that the 
Nautilus sailed. 

This current carries with it all kinds of living things. 
Argonauts, so common in the Mediterranean, were there in 
quantities. Of the grisly sort, the most remarkable were 
the turbot, whose slender tails form nearly the third part 
of the body, and that looked like large lozenges twenty- 
five feet long; also, small sharks a yard long, with large 
heads, short rounded muzzles, pointed teeth in several 
rows, and whose bodies seemed covered with scales. Among 
the bony fish I noticed some gray gobies, peculiar to these 
waters; black giltheads, whose iris shone like fire; sirens 
a yard long, with large snouts thickly set with little teeth, 
that uttered little cries; blue coryphaenes, in gold and sil- 
ver; parrots like the rainbows of the ocean, that could rival 
in color the most beautiful tropical birds; blennies with 



2G8 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

triangular heads; bluish rhombs destitute of scales; ba- 
trachoides covered with yellow transversal bands like a 
Greek cross; heapsof little gobies spotted with yellow; dip- 
terodons with silvery heads and yellow tails; several speci- 
mens of salmon, nuigilomores slender in shape, shining 
with a soft light that Lacepede concentrated to the service 
of his wife; and lastly, a beautiful fish, the American- 
knight, that, decorated with all the orders and ribbons, 
frequent the shores of this great nation, that esteems orders 
and ribbons so little. 

I must add that during the night the phosphorescent 
waters of the Gulf Stream rivaled the electric power of 
our watch-light, especially in the stormy weather that 
threatened us so frequently. May 8th we were still cross- 
ing Cape Hatteras, at the height of the North Caroline. 
The width of the Gulf Stream there is seventy-five miles, 
and its depth 210 yards. The Nautilus still went at ran- 
dom; all supervision seemed abandoned. I thought that 
under these circumstances, escape would be possible. In- 
deed, the inhabited shores offered anywhere an easy refuge. 
The sea was incessantly plowed by the steamers that ply 
between New York or Boston and the Gulf of Mexico, 
and overrun day and night by the little schooners coasting 
about the several parts of the American coast. We could 
hope to be picked up. It was a favorable opportunity, 
notwithstanding the thirty miles that separated the Nau- 
tilus from the coast of the Union. One unfortunate cir- 
cumstance thwarted the Canadian's plans. The weather 
was very bad. "We were Hearing those shores where 
tempests are so frequent that country of waterspouts 
and cyclones actually engendered by the current of the 
Gulf Stream. To tempt the sea in a frail boat was certain 
destruction. Ned Land owned this himself. He fretted, 
seized with nostalgia that flight only could cure. 

" Master," he said that day to me, " this must come to 
an end. I must make a clean breast of it. This Nemo 
is leaving land and going up to the north. But I declare 
to you I have had enough of the South Pole, and I will 
not follow him to the North." 

" What is to be done, Ned, since flight is impracticable 
just now?" 

" We must speak to the captain," said he; "you said 
nothing when you were in your native seas. I will speak. 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 2G9 

now we are in mine. When I think that before long the 
Nautilus will be by Nova Scotia, and that there near 
Newfoundland is a large bay, and into that bay the St. 
Lawrence empties itself, and that the St. Lawrence is my 
river, the river by Quebec, my native town when I think 
of this I feel furious; it makes my hair stand on end. 
Sir, I would rather throw myself into the sea! I will not 
stay here! I am stifled!" 

Tire Canadian was evidently losing all patience. His 
vigorous nature could not stand this prolonged imprison- 
ment. His face altered daily; his temper became more 
surly. I knew what he must suffer, for I was seized with 
nostalgia myself. Nearly seven months had passed with- 
out our having had any news from land; Captain Nemo's 
isolation, his altered spirits, especially since the fight 
with the poulps, his taciturnity, all made me view things 
in a different light. 

"Well, sir?" said Ned, seeing I did not reply. 

"Well, Ned, do you wish me to ask Captain Nemo his 
intentions concerning us?" 

" Yes, sir." 

"Although he has already made them known?" 

"Yes; I wish it settled finally. Speak for me, in my 
name only, if you like." 

" But I so seldom meet him. He avoids me." 

" That is all the more reason for you to go to see him." 

I went to my room. From thence I meant to go to 
Captain Nemo's. It would not do 'to let this opportunity 
of meeting him slip. I knocked at the door. No answer. 
I knocked again, then turned the handle. The door 
opened, I went it. The captain was there. Bending over 
his work-table, he had not heard me. Resolved not to go 
without having spoken, I approached him. He raised his 
head quickly, frowned, and said, roughly, " You here! 
What do you want?" 

"To speak to you, captain." 

" But I am busy, sir; I am working. I leave you at 
liberty to shut yourself up; can not I be allowed the same?" 

This reception was not encouraging; but I was determined 
to hear and answer everything. 

" Sir," I said coolly, " I have to speak to you on a mat- 
ter that admits of no delay." 

"What is , that, sir?" he replied, ironically. "Hay? 



270 20,000 LEAGUES UK-DEfc TE SEAS. 

you discovered something that has escaped me, or has the 
eea delivered up any new secrets?" 

We were at cross purposes. But before I could reply, 
he showed me an open manuscript on his table, and said, 
in a more serious tone, " Here, M. Aronnax, is a manu- 
script written in several languages. It contains the sum 
of my studies of the sea; and, if it please God, it shall 
not perish with me. This manuscript, signed with my 
name, completed with the history of my life, will be shut 
up in a little insubmersible case. The last survivor of all 
of us on board the Nautilus will throw this case into the 
sea, and it will go whither it is borne by the waves." 

This man's name! his history written by himself! His 
mystery would then be revealed some day. 

" Captain," I said, " I can but approve of the idea 
that makes you act thus. The result of your studies must 
not be lost. But the means you employ seem to me to be 
primitive. Who knows where the winds will carry this 
case, and in whose hands it will fall? Could you not use 
some other means? Could not you, or one of yours " 

"Never, sir!" he said, hastily interrupting me. 

"But I and my companions are ready to keep this 
manuscript in store; and, if you will put us at liberty " 

"At liberty?" said the captain, rising. 

" Yes, sir; that is the subject on which I wished to 
question you. For seven months we have been here oil 
board, and I ask you to-day, in the name of my compan- 
ions, and in my own, if your intention is to keep* us here 
always?" 

"M. Aronnax, I will answer you to-day as I did seven 
months ago; whoever enters the Nautilus must never quit 
it." 

" You impose actual slavery on us!" 

" Give it what name you please." 

" But everywhere the slave has the right to regain hia 
liberty." 

" Who denies you this right? Have I ever tried to 
chain you with an oath?" 

He looked at me with his arms crossed. 

" Sir," I said, "to return a second time to this subject 
will be neither to your nor to my taste; but as we have 
entered upon it, let us go through with it. I repeat, it is 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDEll THE SEAS. 271 

not only myself whom it concerns. Study is to me a relief, 
a diversion, a passion that could make me forget every- 
thing. Like you, I am willing to live obscure in the frail 
hope of bequeathing one day, to future time, the result of 
my labors. But it is otherwise with Ned Land. Every 
man, Worthy of the name, deserves some consideration. 
Have you thought that love of liberty, hatred of slavery, 
can give rise to schemes of revenge in a nature like the 
Canadian's; that he could think, attempt, and try " 

I was silenced; Captain Nemo rose. 

" Whatever Ned Land thinks of, attempts, or tries, what 
does it matter to me? I did not seek him! It is not for 
my pleasure that I keep him on board! As for you, M. 
Aronnax, you are one of th^se who can understand every- 
thing, even silence. I have nothing more to say to you. 
Let this first time you have come to treat of this subject 
be the last; for a second time I will not listen to you." 

I retired. Our situation was critical. I related my con- 
versation to my two companions. 

' * We know now," said Ned, " that we can expect noth- 
ing from this man. The Nautilus is nearing Long Island. 
We will escape, whatever the weather may be." 

But the sky became more and more threatening. Symp- 
toms of a hurricane became manifest. The atmosphere 
was becoming white and misty. On the horizon fine 
streaks of cirrous clouds were succeeded by masses of 
cumuli. Other low clouds passed swiftly by. The swollen 
sea rose in huge billows. The birds disappeared, with the 
exception of the petrels, those friends of the storm. The 
barometer fell sensibly, and indicated an extreme tension 
of the vapors. The mixture of the storm-glass was de- 
composed under the influence of the electricity that per- 
vaded the atmosphere. The tempest burst on the 18th of 
May, just as the Nautilus was floating off Long Island, some 
miles from the port of New York. I can describe this strife 
of the elements! for, instead of fleeing to the depths of 
the sea, Captain Nemo, by an unaccountable caprice, 
would brave it at the surface. The wind blew from 
the southwest at first. Captain Nemo, during the 
squalls, had taken his place on the platform. He had 
made himself fast, to prevent being washed overboard by 
the monstrous waves. I had hoisted myself up, and made 
myself fast also, dividing my admiration between the 



27:3 20,000 LEAGUES UNDEti THE SEAS. 

tempest and this extraordinary man who was coping with 
it. The raging sea was swept by huge cloud-drifts, which 
were actually saturated with the waves. The Nautilus, 
sometimes lying on its side, sometimes standing up like a 
mast, rolled and pitched terribly. About five o'clock a 
torrent of rain fell, that lulled neither sea nor wind. The 
hurricane blew nearly forty leagues an hour. It is under 
these conditions that it overturns houses, breaks iron gates, 
displaces twenty-four pounders. However, the Nautilus, 
in the midst of the tempest, confirmed the words of a 
clever engineer: " There is no well-constructed hull that 
cannot defy the sea." This was not a resisting rock; it 
was a steel spindle obedient and movable, without rigging 
or masts, that braved its fury with impunity. However, 
I watched these raging waves attentively. They measured 
fifteen feet in height, and 150 to 170 yards long, and their 
speed of propagation was thirty feet per second. Their 
bulk and power increased with the depth of the water. 
Such waves as these at the Hebrides have displaced a 
mass weighing 8,400 Ibs. They are they which, in the 
tempest of December 23, 1864, after destroying the town 
of Yeddo, in Japan, broke the same day on the shores of 
America. The intensity of the tempest increased with the 
night. The barometer, as in 1860, at Reunion, during a 
cyclone, fell seven-tenths at the close of day. I saw a large 
vessel pass the horizon, struggling painfully. She was try- 
ing to lay to under half-steam, to keep up above the waves. 
It was probably one of the steamers of the line from New 
York to Liverpool or Havre. It soon disappeared in the 
gloom. At ten o'clock in the evening the sky was on fire. 
The atmosphere was streaked with vivid lightning. I 
could not bear the brightness of it; while the captain, 
looking at it, seemed to envy the spirit of the tempest. 
A terrible noise filled the air, a complex noise, made 
up of the howls of the crushed waves, the roaring 
of the wind, and the claps of thunder. The wind veered 
suddenly to all points of the horizon; paid the cyclone, 
rising in the east, returned after passing by the north, 
west and south, in the inverse course pursued by the cir- 
cular storms of the southern hemisphere. Ah, the Gulf 
Stream! It deserves its name of the King of Tempests. It 
is that which causes those formidable cyclones, by the 
difference of temperature betw eeu its air and its currents. 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 273 

A shower of fire had succeeded the rain. The drops of 
water were changed to sharp spikes. One would "have 
thought that Captain Nemo was courting a death worthy 
of himself, a death by lightning. As the Nautilus, pitch- 
ing dreadfully, raised its steel spur in the air, it seemed 
to act as a conductor, and I saw long sparks burst from it. 
Crushed and without strength, I crawled to the panel, 
opened it, and descended to the saloon. The storm was 
then at its height. It was impossible to stand upright in 
the interior of the Nautilus. Captain Nemo came down 
about twelve. I heard the reservoirs filling by degrees, 
and the Nautilus sank slowly beneath t-he waves. Through 
the open windows of the saloon I saw larsre fish, terrified, 
passing like phantoms in the water. Some were struck 
before my eyes. The Nautilus was still descending. I 
thought that about eight fathoms deep we should find a 
calm. But no! the upper beds were too violently agi- 
tated for that. We had to seek repose at more than twenty- 
five fathoms in the bowels of tbe deep. But there, what 
quiet, what silence, what peace! Who could have told that 
such a hurricane had been let loose on the surface of the 
ocean? 



