CHAPTER VI.  

THE GRECIAN ARCHIPELAGO. 

THE next day, the 12th of February, at the dawn of day, 
the Nautilus rose to the surface. I hastened on to the 
platform. Three miles to the south the dim outline of 
Pelusium was to be seen. A torrent had carried us from 
one sea to the other. About seven o'clock Ned and Con- 
aeil joined me. 



20,000 LEAGUES UKDEB THE SEAS. 173 

"Well, Sir Naturalist," said the Canadian, in a slightly 
jovial tone, ''and the Mediterranean?" 

" We are floating on its surface, friend Ned." 

" What!" said Conseil, " this very night." 

" Yes, this very night; in a few minutes we have passed 
this impassable isthmus." 

" I do not believe it," replied the Canadian. 

"Then you are wrong, Master Land," I continued; 
"this low coast which rounds off to the south, is the 
Egyptian coast. And you, who have such good eyes, Ned, 
you can see the jetty of Port Said stretching into the sea." 

The Canadian looked attentively. 

" Certainly you are right, sir, and your captain is a first- 
rate man. We are in the Mediterranean. Good! Now 
if you please, let us talk of our little affair, but so that no 
one hears us." 

I saw what the Canadian wanted, and, in any case, I 
thought it better to let him talk, as he wished it; so we all 
three went and sat down near the lantern, where we were 
less exposed to the spray of the blades. 

"Now, Ned, we listen; what have you to tell us?" 

" What I have to tell you is very simple. We are in 
Europe; and before Captain Nemo's caprices drag us once 
more to the bottom of the Polar seas, or lead us into 
Oceanica, I ask to leave the Nautilus." 

I wished in no way to shackle the liberties of my com- 
panions, but I certainly felt no desire to leave Captain 
Nemo. 

Thanks to him, and thanks to his apparatus, I was each 
day nearer the completion of my submarine studies; and I 
was re-writing my book of submarine depths in its very 
element. Should I ever again have such an opportunity 
of observing the wonders of the ocean? No, certainly not! 
And I could not bring myself to the idea of abandoning 
the Nautilus before the cycle of investigation was accom- 
plished. 

" Friend Ned, answer me frankly, are you tired of being 
on board? Are you sorry that destiny has thrown us into 
Captain Nemo's hands?" 

The Canadian remained some moments without answer- 
ing. Then crossing his arms, he said: 

"Frankly, I do not regret this journey under the seas. 



174 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

I shall be glad to have made it; but now that it is made, 
let us have done with it. That is my idea." 

"It will come to an end, Ned." 

" Where and when?" 

" Where I do not know, when I cannot say; or, rather, 
I suppose it will end when these seas have nothing more 
to teach us." 

"Then what do you hope for?" demanded the Cana- 
dian. 

"That circumstances may occur as well six months 
hence as now by which we may and ought to profit." 

" Oh," said Ned Land, " and where shall we be in six 
months, if you please, Sir Naturalist." 

" Perhaps in China; you know the Nautilus is a rapid 
traveler. It goes through water as swallows through the 
air, or as an express on the land. It does not fear fre- 
quented seas; who can say that it may not beat the coast 
of France, England, or America, on which flight may be 
attempted as advantageously as here." 

" M. Aronnax," replied the Canadian, " your argu- 
ments are rotten at the foundation. You speak in the 
future, * We shall be there! we shall be here?' I speak in 
the present, ' We are here, and we must profit by it.' ' 

Ned Land's logic pressed me hard, and I felt myself 
beaten on that ground. I knew not what argument would 
now tell in my favor. 

"Sir," continued Ned, "let us suppose an impossi- 
bility; if Captain Nemo should this day offer you your 
liberty, would you accept it?" 

"I do not know," I answered. 

" And if," he added, " the offer he made you this day 
was never to be renewed, would you accept it?" 

" Friend Ned, this is my answer. Your reasoning is 
against me. We must not rely on Captain Nemo's good- 
will. Common prudence forbids him to set us at liberty. 
On the other side, prudence bids us profit by the first 
opportunity to leave the Nautilus." 

" Well, M. Aronnax, that is wisely said." 

" Only one observation just one. The occasion must 
be serious, and our first attempt must succeed, if it fails, 
we shall never find another, and Captain Nemo will never 
forgive us." 

"All that is true," replied the Canadian. "But your 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 175 

observation applies equally to all attempts at flight, whether 
in two years' time, or two days. But the question is still 
this; if a favorable opportunity presents itself, it must be 
seized." 

"Agreed! and now, Ned, will you tell me what you 
mean by a favorable opportunity?" 

"It will be that which, on a dark night, will bring the 
Nautilus a short distance from some European coast." 

" And you will try and save yourself by swimming?" 

" Yes, if we were near enough to the bank, and if the 
vessel was floating at the time. Not if the bank was far 
away, and the boat was under the water." 

" And in that case?" 

" In that case, I should seek to make myself master of 
the pinnace. I know how it is worked. We must get in- 
side, and the bolts once drawn, we shall come to the sur- 
face of the water, without even the pilot, who is in the 
bows, perceiving our flight." 

" Well, Ned, watch for the opportunity; but do not for- 
get that a hitch will ruin us." 

" I will not forget, sir." 

" And now, Ned, would you like to know what I think 
of your project?" 

" Certainly, M. Aronnax." 

" Well, I think I do not sa7 I hope I think that this 
favorable opportunity will never present itself." 

" Why not?" 

" Because Captain Nemo cannot hide from himself that 
we have not given up all hope of regaining our liberty, 
and he will be on his guard, above all, in the seas, and in 
the sight of European coasts." 

" We shall see," replied Ned Land, shaking his head 
determinedly. 

'And now, Ned Land," I added, "let us stop here. 
Not another word on the subject. The day that you are 
ready, come and let us know, and we will follow you. I 
rely entirely upon you." 

Thus ended a conversation which, at no very distant 
time, led to such grave results. I must say here that facts 
seemed to confirm my foresight, to the Canadian's great 
despair. Did Captain Nemo distrust us in these frequented 
seas? or did he only wish to hide himself from the numer- 
ous vessels, of all nations, which plowed the Mediterra- 



176 20,000 LEAGUES UNDEil THE SEAS. 

nean? I could not tell; but we were oftener between 
waters, and far from the coast. Or, if the Nautilus did 
emerge, nothing was to be seen but the pilot's cage; and 
sometimes it went to great depths, for, between the Gre- 
cian Archipelago and Asia Minor, we could not touch the 
botton by more than a thousand fathoms. 

Thus I only knew we were near the island of Carpathos, 
one of the Sporades, by Captain Nemo reciting these lines 
from Virgil 

" Est in Carpathio Neptuni gurgite vates, 
Cseruleus Proteus," 

as he pointed to a spot on the planisphere. 

It was indeed the ancient abode of Proteus, the old 
shepherd of Neptune's flocks, now the island of Scarpanto, 
situated between Rhodes and Crete. I saw nothing but 
the granite base through the glass panels of the saloon. 

The next day, the 14th of February, I resolved to em- 
ploy some hours in studying the fishes of the Archipelago; 
but, for some reason or other, the panels remained her- 
metically sealed. Upon taking the course of the Nautilus, 
I found that we were going toward Candia, the ancient 
Isle of Crete. At the time I embarked on the Abra- 
ham Lincoln, the whole of this island had risen in insur- 
rection against the despotism of the Turks. But how the 
insurgents had fared since that time I was absolutely ig- 
norant, and it was not Captain Nemo, deprived of all land 
communications, who could tell me. 

I made no allusion to this event when that night I found 
myself alone with him in the saloon. Besides he seemed 
to" be tactiturn and preoccupied. Then contrary to his 
custom, he ordered both panels to be opened, and going 
from one to the other, observed the mass of Vaters attent- 
ively. To what end I could not guess; so, on my side, I 
employed my time in studying the fish passing before my 
eyes. 

Amongst others, I remarked some gobies, mentioned by 
Aristotle, and commonly known by the name of sea- 
braches, which are more particularly met with in the salt 
waters lying near the Delta of the Nile. Near them rolled 
some sea-bream, half phosphorescent, a kind of sparus, 
which the Egyptians ranked amongst their sacred animals, 
whose arrival in the waters of their river announced a fer- 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 177 

tile overflow, anil was celebrated by religious ceremonies. I 
also noticed some cheilines about nine inches long, a bony 
fish with transparent shell, whose livid color is mixed 
with red spots; they are great eaters of marine vegetation, 
which gives them an exqusite flavor. These cheiliues 
were much sought after by the epicures of ancient Rome; 
the inside dressed with the soft roe of the lamprey, pea- 
cock's brains, and tongues of the phenicoptera, composed 
that divine dish of which Vitellius was so enamored. 

Another inhabitant of these seas drew my attention, and 
led my mind back to recollections of antiquity. It was the 
remora, that fastens on to the shark's belly. This little 
fish, according to the ancients, hooking on to the ship's 
bottom, could stop its movements; and one of them, by 
keeping back Antony's ship during the battle of Actium, 
helped Augustus to gain the victory. On how little hangs 
the'destiny of nations! I observed some fine anthi, which 
belong to the order of lutjans, a fish held sacred by the 
Greeks,, who attributed to them the power of hunting the 
marine monsters from waters they frequented. Their 
name signifies flower, and they justify their appellation by 
their shaded colors, their shades comprising the whole 
gamut of reds, from the paleness of the rose to the bright- 
ness of the ruby, and the fugitive tints that clouded their 
dorsal fin. My eyes could not leave these wonders of the 
sea, when they were suddenly struck by an unexpected ap- 
parition. 

In the midst of the waters a man appeared, a diver, 
carrying at his belt a leathern purse. It was not a body 
abandoned to the waves; it was a living man, swimming 
with a strong hand, disappearing occasionally to take 
breath at the surface. 

I turned toward Captain Nemo, and in an agitated voice 
exclaimed : 

" A man shipwrecked! He must be saved at any price!" 

The captain did not answer me, but came and leaned 
against the panel. 

The man had approached, and with his face flattened 
against the glass was looking at us. 

To my great amazement, Captain Nemo signed to him. 
The driver answered with his hand, mounted immediately 
to the surface of the water, and did not appear again. 

"Do not be uncomfortable," said Captain Nemo. " It 



178 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE EAS, 

is Nicholas of Cape Matnpan, surnamed Pesca. He is 
well known in all the Cyclades. A bold diver! water is his 
element, and he lives more in it than on land, going con- 
tinually from one island to another, even as far as Crete." 

"You know him, Captain?" 

" Why not, M. Avon mix?" 

Saying which, Captain Nemo went toward a piece of 
furniture standing near the left panel of the saloon. Near 
this piece of furniture, I saw a chest bound with iron, on 
the cover of which was a copper plate, bearing the cipher 
of the Nautilus with its device. 

At that moment, the captain, without noticing my pres- 
ence, opened the piece of furniture, a sort of strong box, 
which held a great many ingots. 

They were ingots of gold. From whence came this 
precious metal, which represented an enormous sum? 
Where did the captain gather this gold from? and what 
was he going to do with it? 

I did not say one word. I looked. Captain Nemo took 
the ingots one by one, and arranged them methodically in 
the chest, which he filled entirely. I estimated the con- 
tents at more more than 4,000 Ibs. weight of gold, that is 
to say, nearly 200,000. 

The chest was securely fastened, and the captain wrote 
an address on the lid, in characters which must have be- 
longed to Modern Greece. 

This done, Captain Nemo pressed a knob, the wire of 
which communicated with the quarters of the crew. Four 
men appeared, and, not without some trouble, pushed the 
chest out of the saloon. Then I heard them hoisting it 
up the iron staircase by means of pulleys. 

At that moment, Captain Nemo turned to me. 

" And you were saying, sir?" said he. 

" I was saying nothing, Captain." 

" Then, sir, if you will allow me, I will wish you good 
night." 

Whereupon he turned and left the saloon. 

I returned to my room, much troubled, as one may be- 
lieve. I vainly tried to sleep I sought the connecting 
link between the apparition of the diver and the chest 
filled with gold. Soon I felt by certain movements of 
pi tching and tossing, that the Nautilus was leaving the 
depths and returning to the surface. 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 179 

Then I heard steps upon the platform; and I knew 
they were unfastening the pinnace, and launching it 
upon the waves. For one instant it struck the side of the 
Nautilus, then all noise ceased. 

Two hours after, the same noise, the same going and 
coming was renewed; the boat was hoisted on board, re- 
placed in its socket, and the Nautilus again plunged under 
the waves. 

So these millions had been transported to their address. 
To what point of the continent? Who was Captain Nemo's 
correspondent? 

The next day I related to Conseil and the Canadian the 
events of the night, which had excited my curiosity to the 
highest degree. My companions were not less surprised 
than myself. 

" But where does he take his millions to?" asked Ned 
Land. 

To that there was no possible answer. I returned to 
the saloon after having breakfast, and set to work. Till 
five o'clock in the evening I employed myself in arranging 
my notes. At that moment (ought I to attribute it to 
some peculiar idiosyncrasy?) I felt so great a Inat that I 
was obliged to take off my coat of byssus! It was strange, 
for we were not under low latitudes; and even then, the 
Nautilus, submerged as it was, ought to experience no 
change of temperature. I looked at the manometer; it 
showed a depth of sixty feet, to which atmospheric heat 
eould never attain. 

I continued my work, but, the temperature rose to 
such a pitch as to be intolerable. 

"Could there be fire on board?" I asked myself. 

I was leaving the saloon, when Captain Nemo entered; 
he approached the thermometer, consulted it, and turning 
to me said: 

"Forty-two degrees." 

" I have noticed it, Captain," I replied; " and if it gets 
much hotter we cannot bear it." 

" 0, sir, it will not get hotter if we do not wish it!" 

" You can reduce it as you please, then?" 

"No; but I can go further from the stove which pro- 
duces it." \ 

"It is onward then?" 

"Certainly; we are floating in a current of boiling water," 



180 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

"Is it possible!" I exclaimed. 

" Look." 

The panels opened, and I saw the sea entirely white all 
around. A sulphurous smoke was curling amid the 
waves, which boiled like water in a copper. I placed my 
hand on one of the panes of glass, but the heat was so 
great that I quickly took it off again. 

" Where are we?" I asked. 

" Near the Island of Santorin, sir," replied the captain, 
"and just in the canal which separates Nea Kamenni 
from Pali Kamenni. I wished to give you a sight of the 
curious spectacle of a submarine eruption." 

" I thought," said I, " that the formation of these new 
islands was ended." 

"Nothing is ever ended in the volcanic parts of the 
sea," replied Captain Nemo; "and the globe is always 
being worked by subterranean fires. Already, in the nine- 
teenth year of our era, according to Cassiodorus and Pliny, 
a new island, Theia (the divine), appeared in the very 
place where these islets have recently been formed. Then 
they sank under the waves, to rise again in the year 69, 
when they again subsided. Since that time to our days, 
the Plutonian work has been suspended. But, on the 3d 
of February, 1866, a new island, which they named G-eorge 
Island, emerged from the midst of the sulphurous vapor 
near Nea Kamenni, and settled again the sixth of the 
same month. Seven days after, the 13th of February, the 
island of Aphroessa appeared, leaving between Nea Ka- 
menni and itself a canal ten yards broad. I was in these 
seas when the phenomenon occurred, and I was able there- 
fore to observe all the different phases. The island of 
Aphroessa, of round form, measured 300 feet in diameter, 
and thirty feet in height. It was composed of black and 
vitreous lava, mixed with fragments of feldspar. And 
lastly, on the 10th of March, a smaller island, called Eeka, 
showed itself near Nea Kamenni, and since then these 
three have joined together, forming but one and the same 
island." 

" And the canal in which we are at this moment?" I 
asked. 

" Here it is," replied Captain Nemo, showing me a 
map of the Archipelago. "You see I have marked the 
new islands," 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 181 

I returned to the glass.. The Nautilus was no longer 
moving, the heat was becoming unbearable. The sea, 
which till now had been white, was red, .owing to the 
presence of salts of iron. In spite of the ship's being her- 
metically sealed, an insupportable smell of sulphur filled 
the saloon, and the brilliancy of the electricity was entirely 
extinguished by bright scarlet flames. I was in a bath, I 
was choking, I was broiled. 

" We can remain no longer in this boiling water," said 
I to the captain. 

" It would not be prudent," replied the impassive Cap- 
tain Nemo. 

An order was given; the Nautilus tacked about and left 
the furnace it could not brave with impunity. A quarter 
of ;jn hour after we were breathing fresh air on the sur- 
face. The thought then struck me that, if Ned Land had 
chosen this part of the sea for our flight, we should never 
have come alive out of this sea of fire. 

The next day, the 16th of February, we left the basin 
which, between Khodes and Alexandria, is reckoned about 
1,500 fathoms in depth, and the Nautilus, passing some 
distance from Cerigo, quitted the Grecian Archipelago, 
after having doubled Cape Matapan. 



