CHAPTER XIII. 

THE ICEBEKG. 

THE Nautilus was steadily pursuing its southerly course, 
following the fifteenth meridian with considerable speed. 
Did he wish to reach the pole? I did not think so, for 
every attempt to reach that point had hitherto failed. 
Again the season was far advanced; for in the antarctic re- 
gions the 13th of March corresponds with the 13th of 
September of northern regions, which begin at the equi- 
noctial season. On the 14th of March I saw floating ice in 
the latitude 55, merely pale bits of debris from twenty to 
twenty-five feet long, forming banks over which the sea 
curled. The Nautilus remained on the surface of the 
ocean. Ned Land, who had fished in the arctic seas, was 
familiar with its icebergs; but Conseil and I admired them 
for the first time. In the atmosphere toward the southern 
horizon stretched a white dazzling band. English whaleRs 
have given it the name of " ice olink." However thick 
the clouds may be, it is always visible, and announces the 
presence of an ice pack or bank. Accordingly, larger 
blocks soon appeared, whose brilliancy changed with the 
caprices of the fog. Some of these masses showed green 
veins, as if long undulating lines had been traced with 
sulphate of copper; others resembled enormous amethysts 
with the light shining through them. Some reflected the 
light of day upon a thousand crystal facets. Others 
shaded with vivid calcareous reflections resembled a per- 



322 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

feet town of marble. The more we neared the south, the 
more these floating islands increased both in number and 
importance. 

At the sixtieth degree of latitude, every pass had disap- 
peared. But seeking carefully, Captain Nemo soon found 
a narrow opening, through which he boldly slipped, know- 
ing, however, that it would close behind him. Thus, 
guided by this clever hand, the NautiHs passed through 
all the ice with a precision which quite charmed Conseil; 
icebergs or mountains, ice-fields or smooth plains, seeming 
to have no limits, drift ice or floating ice-packs, or plains 
broken up, called palcJis v r hen they are circular, and 
streams when they are made up of long strips. The tem- 
perature was very low; the ^thermometer exposed to the 
air marked two or three degrees below zero, but we were 
warmly clad with fur, at the expense of the sea-bear ana 
seal. The interior of the Nautilus, warmed regularly by 
its electrical apparatus, defied the most intense cold. Be- 
sides, it would only have been necessary to go some yards 
beneath the surface of the waves to find a more bearable 
temperatuue. Two months earlier we should have had 
perpetual daylight in these latitudes; but already we had 
throe or four hours night, and by and by there would be 
six months of darkness in these circum-polar regions. On 
the 15th of March we were in the latitude of New Shet- 
land and South Orkney. The captain told me that for- 
merly numerous tribes of seals inhabited them; but that 
English and American whalers, in their rage for destruc- 
tion, massacred both old and young; thus where was once 
life and animation, they had left silence and death. 

About eight o'clock on the morning of the 16th of 
March, the Nautilus, following the fifty-fifth meridian, 
cut the antarctic polar circle. Ice surrounded us on all 
sides, and closed the horizon. But Captain Nemo went 
from one opening to another, still going higher. 1 cannot 
express my astonishment at the beauties of these new 
regions. The ice took most surprising forms. Here the 
grouping formed an Oriental town, with innumerable 
mosques and minarets; there a fallen city thrown to tho 
earth, as it were, by some convulsion of nature. The whole 
aspect was constantly changed by the oblique rays of the 
sun, or lost in the grayish fog amidst hurricanes of snow. 
Detonations and falls were heard ou all sides, great over- 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 223 

throws of icebergs, which altered the whole landscape like 
a diorama. Often seeing no exit, I thought we were defi- 
nitely prisoners; but instinct guiding him at the slightest 
indication Captain Nemo would discover a new pass. He 
was never mistaken when he saw the thin threads of bluish 
water trickling along the ice-fields; and I had no doubt 
that he had already ventured into the midst of these ant- 
arctic seas before. On the 16th of March, however, the 
ice-fields absolutely blocked our road. It was not the ice- 
berg itself, as yet, but vast fields cemented by the cold. 
But this obstacle could not stop Captain Nemo: he hurled 
himself against it with frightful violence. The Nautilus 
entered the brittle mass like a wedge, and split it with 
frightful crackings. It was the battering-ram of the an- 
cient hurled by infiaite strength. The ice, thrown high in 
the air, fell like hail around us. By its own power of im- 
pulsion our apparatus made a canal for itself; sometimes 
carried away by its own impetus it lodged en the ice-field, 
crushing it with its weight, and sometimes buried beneath 
it, dividing it by a simple pitching movement, producing 
large rents in it. Violent gales assailed us at this time, 
accompanied by thick fogs, through which, from one end 
of tjie platform to the other, we could see nothing. The 
wind blew sharply from all points of the compass, and the 
snow lay in such hard heaps that we had to break it 
with blows of a pickax. The temperature was at five 
degrees below zero; every outward part of the Nautilus 
was covered with ice. A rigged vessel could never have 
worked its way there, for all the rigging would have been, 
entangled in the blocked-up gorges. A vessel without 
sails, with electricity for its motive-power, and wanting 
no coal, could alone brave such high latitudes. At length, 
on the 18th of March, after many useless assaults, the 
Nautilus was positively blocked. It was no longer either 
streams, packs, or ice-fields, but an interminable and im- 
movable barrier, formed by mountains soldered together. 

"An iceberg!" said the Canadian to me. 

I knew that to Ned Land, as well as to all other navi- 
gators who had preceded us, this was an inevitable 
obstacle. The sun appearing for an instant at noon, 
Captain Nemo took an observation as near as possible, 
which gave our situation at 51 30' longitude and 67 39' 
as south latitude, W had advanced one degree more in 



224 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

this antarctic region. Of the liquid surface of the sea there 
was no longer a glimpse. Under the spur of the Nautilus 
lay stretched a vast plain, entangled with confused blocks. 
Here and there sharp points, and slender needles rising to 
a height of 200 feet; further on a steep shore, hewn as it 
were with an ax, and clothed with grayish tints; huge 
mirrors, reflecting a few rays of sunshine, half drowned in 
the fog. And over this desolate face of nature a stern 
silence reigned, scarcely broken by the flapping of the 
wings of petrels and puffins. Everything was Irozen 
even the noise. The Nautilus was then obliged to stop in 
its adventurous course amid these fields of ice. In spite 
of our efforts, in spite of the powerful means employed to 
break up the ice, the Nautilus remained immovable. 
Generally, when we can proceed no further, we have re- 
turn still open to us; but here return was as impossible as 
advance, for every pass had closed behind us; and for the 
few moments when we were stationary, we were likely to 
be entirely blocked, which did, indeed, happen about 
two o'clock in the afternoon, the fresh ice forming around 
its sides with astonishing rapidity. I was obliged to admit 
that Captain Ntmo was more than imprudent. I was on 
the platform at that moment. The captain had been ob- 
serving our situation for some time past, when he said to 
me: 

" Well, sir, what do you think of this?" 

" I think that we are caught, Captain." 

"So, M. Aronnax, you really think that the Nautilus 
cannot disengage itself." 

" With difficulty, Captain; for the season is already too 
far advanced for you to reckon on the breaking up of the 
ice." 

"Ah! sir," said Captain Nemo, in an ironical tone, 
"you will always be the same. You see nothing but diffi- 
culties and obstacles. I affirm that not only can the 
Nautilus disengage itself, but also that it can go further 
Btill." 

" Further to the south?" I asked, looking at the cap- 
tain. 

"Yes, sir; it shall go to the pole." 

"To the pole!" I exclaimed, unable to repress a gesture 
of incredulity. 

" Yes," replied the captain, coldly, " to the antarctic 



20,000 LEAGUES CINDER THE SEAS. 225 

pole, to that unknown point from whence springs every 
meridian of the globe. You know whether I can do as I 
please with the Nautilus?" 

Yes, I knew that. I knew that this man was bold, 
even to rashness. But to conquer those obstacles which 
bristled round the south pole, rendering it more inacces- 
sible than the north, which had not yet been reached by 
the boldest navigators was it not a mad enterprise, one 
which only a maniac would have conceived? It then came 
into my head to ask Captain Nemo if he had ever discovered 
that pole which had never yet been trodden by a human 
creature. 

" No, sir," he replied, "but we will discover it together. 
Where others have failed, / will not fail. I have never 
yet led my Nautilus so far into southern seas; but, I re- 
peat, it shall go further yet." 

"I can well believe you, Captain," said I, in a slightly 
ironical tone. "I believe yon. Let us go ahead! There 
are no obstacles for us! Let us smash this iceberg! Let 
us blow it up; and if it resists, let us give the Nautilus 
wings to fly over it!" 

" Over it, sir!" said Captain Nemo quietly; "no, not 
over it, but under it!" 

" Under it!" I exclaimed, a sudden idea of the captain's 
projects flashing upon my mind. I understood the won- 
derful qualities of the Nautilus were going to serve us in 
this superhuman enterprise. 

" I see we are beginning to understand one another, 
sir," said the captain, half smiling. " You begin to see 
the possibility I should say the success of this attempt. 
That which is impossible for an ordinary vessel, is easy 
to the Nautilus. If a continent lies before the pole, it 
must stop before the continent; but if on the contrary, 
the pole is washed by open sea, it will go even to the pole." 

" Certainly," said I, carried away by the captain's rea- 
soning; " if the surface of the sea is solidified by the ice, 
the lower depths are free by the providential law which 
has placed the maximum of density of the waters of the 
ocean one degree higher than freezing point; and, if I 
am not mistaken, the portion of this iceberg which is 
above the water is as one to four to that which is below." 

" Very nearly, sir; for one foot of iceberg above the sea 
there are three below it. If these ice mountains are not 



226 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

more than 300 feet above the surface, they are not more 
than 900 beneath. And what are 900 feet to the Nau- 
tilus?" 

"Nothing, sir." 

" It could even seek at greater depths that uniform 
temperature of sea water, and there brave with impunity 
the thirty or forty degrees of surface cold." 

"Just so, sir just so," I replied, getting animated. 

"The only difficulty," continued Captain Nemo, "is 
that of remaining several days without renewing our pro- 
vision of air." 

" Is that all? The Nautilus has vast reservoirs; we can 
fill them, and they will supply us with all the oxygen we 
want." 

" Well thought of, M. Aronnax," replied the captain, 
smiling. " But not wishing you to accuse me of rashness, 
I will first give you all my objections." 

" Have you any more to make?" 

" Only one. It is possible, if the sea exists at the 
south pole, that it may be covered; and, consequently, we 
shall be unable to come to the surface." 

" Good, sir! but do you forget that the Nautilus is 
armed with a powerful spur, and could we not send it 
diagonally against these fields of ice, which would open at 
the shock." 

"Ah! sir, you are full of ideas to-day." 

"Besides, Captain," I added, enthusiastically, "why 
should we not find the sea open at the south pole as well 
as at the north? The frozen poles and the poles of the 
earth do not coincide, either in the southern or in the 
northern regions; and, until it is proved to the contrary, 
we may suppose either a continent or an ocean free from 
ice at these two points of the globe." 

" I think so too, M. Aronnax," replied Captain Nemo. 
" I only wish you to observe that, after having made so 
many objections to my project, you are now crushing me 
with arguments in its favor!" 

The preparations for this audacious attempt now began. 
The powerful pumps of the Nautilus were working air 
into the reservoirs and storing it at high pressure. About 
four o'clock Captain Nemo announced the closing of the 
panels on the platform. I threw one last look at the 
massive iceberg which we were going to cross. The weather 



20,000 LEAGUES UXDER THE SEAS. 227 

was clear, the atmosphere pure enough, the cold very 
great, being twelve degrees below zero; but the wind hav- 
ing gone down, this temperature was not so unbearable. 
About ten men mounted the sides of the Nautilus, armed 
with pickaxes to break the ice around the vessel, which 
was soon free. The operation was quickly performed, for 
the fresh ice was still very thin. We all went below. The 
usual reservoirs were filled with the newly liberated water, 
and the Nautilus soon descended. I had taken my place 
with Conseil in the saloon: through the open window we 
could see the lower beds of the Southern Ocean. The 
thermometer went up, the needle of tne compass deviated 
on the dial. At about 900 feet, as Captain Nemo had 
foreseen, we were floating beneath the undulating bottom 
of the iceberg. But the Nautilus went lower still it 
went to the depth of four hundred fathoms. The tem- 
perature of the water at the surface showed twelve degrees, 
it was now only ten; we had gained two. 1 need not say 
the temperature of the Nautilus was raised by its heating 
apparatus to a much higher degree; every maneuver was 
accomplished with wonderful precision. 

"We shall pass it, if you please, sir," said Conseil. 

" I believe we shall," I said, in a tone of firm convic- 
tion. 

In this open sea the Nautilus had taken its course direct 
to the pole, without leaving the fifty-second meridian. 
From 67 30' to 90, twenty-two degrees and a half of 
latitude remained to travel, that is, about five hundred 
leagues. The Nautilus kept up a mean speed of twenty- 
six miles an hour the speed of an express train. If that 
was kept up in forty-eight hours we should reach the pole. 

For a part of the night the novelty of the situation 
kept us at the window. The sea was lit with the elec- 
tric lantern; but it was deserted; fishes did not sojourn 
in these imprisoned waters; they only found there a 
passage to take them from the antarctic ocean to the 
open polar sea. Our progress was rapid; we could feel 
by the quivering of the long steel body. About two in 
the morning I took some hours' repose, and Conseil did 
the same. In crossing the waist I did not meet Captain 
Nemo; I supposed him to be in the pilot's cage. The 
next morning, the 19th of March, I took my post once 
more in the saloon. The electric log told me that the 



228 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

speed of the Nautilus had been slackened. It was then 
going toward the surface, but prudently emptying its 
reservoirs very slowly. My heart beat fast. Were we 
going to emerge and regain the open polar atmosphere? 
No! A shock told me that the Nautilus had struck the 
bottom of the iceberg, still very thick, judging from the 
deadened sound. We had indeed "struck," to use a 
sea expression, but in an inverse sense, at a thousand 
feet deep. This would give three thousand feet of ice 
above us; one thousand being above the water-mark. The 
iceberg was then higher than at its borders not a very 
reassuring fact. Several times that day the Nautilus tried 
again, and every time it struck the wall which lay like a 
ceiling above us. Sometimes it met with but 900 yards, 
only 200 of which rose above the surface. It was twice 
the height it was when the Nautilus had gone under the 
waves. I carefully noted the different depths, and thus 
obtained a submarine profile of the chain as it was devel- 
oped under the water. That night no change had taken 
place in our situation. Still ice between four and five 
hundred yards in depths! It was evidently diminishing, 
but still what a thickness between us and the surface of 
the ocean! It was then eight. According to the daily 
custom on board the Nautilus, its air should have been 
renewed four hours ago; but I did not suffer much, al- 
though Captain Nemo had not yet made any demand 
upon his reserve of oxygen. My sleep was painful that 
night; hope and fear besieged me by turns: I rose several 
times. The groping of the Nautilus continued. About 
three in the morning, I noticed that the lower surface of 
the iceberg was only about fifty feet deep. One hundred 
and fifty feet now separated us from the surface of the 
waters. The iceberg was by degrees becoming an ice-field, 
the mountain a plain. My eyes never left the manometer. 
We were still rising diagonally to the surface, which spark- 
led under the electric rays. The iceberg was stretching 
both above and beneath into lengthening slopes; mile 
after mile it was getting thinner. At length, at six in the 
morning of that memorable day, the 19th of March, the 
door of the saloon opened, and Captain Nemo appeared. 
" The sea is open!" was all he said. 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 229 



