CHAPTER XXI. 

CAPTAIN NEMO'S THUNDERBOLT. 

WE looked at the edge of the forest without rising, mj 
hand stopping in the action of putting it to my mouth, 
Ned Land's completing its office. 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 117 

" Stones do not fall from the sky, remarked Conseil, 
" of they would merit the name of aerolites." 

A second stone, carefully aimed, that made a savory 
pigeon's leg fall from Conseil's hand, gave still more 
weight to his observation. We all three arose, aad 
shouldered our guns, and were ready to reply to any at- 
tack. 

"Are they apes?" cried Ned Land. 

" Very nearly they are savages." 

" To the boat!" I said, hurrying to the sea. 

It was indeed necessary to beat a retreat, for about 
twenty natives, armed with bows aud slings, appeared on 
the skirts of a copse that masked the horizon to the right, 
hardly a hundred steps from us. 

Our boat was moored about sixty feet from us. The 
savages approached us, not running, but making hostile 
demonstrations. Stones and arrows fell thickly. 

Ned Land had not wished to leave his provisions; and, 
in spite of his imminent danger, his pig on one side, and 
kangaroos on the other, he went tolerably fast. In two 
minutes we were on the shore. To load the boat with 
provisions and arms, to push it out to sea, and ship the 
oars, was the work of an instant. We had not gone two 
cable-lengths when a hundred savages, howling and gesti- 
culating, entered the water up to their waists. I watched 
to see if their apparition would attract some men from the 
Nautilus on to the platform. But no. The enormous 
machine, lying off, was absolutely deserted. 

Twenty minutes later we were on board. The panels 
were open. And after making the boat fast, we entered 
into the interior of the Nautilus. 

I descended to the drawing-room, from whence I heard 
some chords. Captain Nemo was there, bending over his 
organ, and plunged in a musical ecstasy. "Captain!" 
He did not hear me. "Captain!" I said again, touching 
his hand. 

He shuddered, and turning round, said, "Ah! is it you, 
Professor? Well, have you had a good hunt? Have you 
botanized successfully?" 

" Yes, Captain, but we have unfortunately brought a 
troop of bipeds, whose vicinity troubles me." 

" What bipeds?" 

" Savages." 



118 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

"Savages!" he echoed, ironically. "So you are aston- 
ished, Professor, at having set foot on a strange land and 
finding savages? Savages! where are there not any? Be- 
sides, are they worse than others, these whom you call 
savages?" 

" But, Captain 

" How many have you counted?" 

" A hundred at least." 

" M. Aronnax," replied Captain Nemo, placing his 
finger:? on the organ stops, " when all the natives of Papua 
are assembled on this shore, the Nautilus will have nothing 
to fear from their attacks." 

The Captain's fingers were then running over the keys 
of the instrument, and I remarked that he touched only 
the black keys, which gave to his melodies an essentially 
Scotch character. Soon he had forgotten my presence, 
and had plunged into a reverie that I did not disturb. I 
went up again on to the platform night had already 
fallen; for, in this low latitude, the sun sets rapidly and 
without twilight. I could only see the island indistinct- 
ly; but the numerous fires lighted on the beach showed 
that the natives did not think of leaving it. I was alone 
for several hours, sometimes thinking of the natives but 
without any dread of them, for the imperturbable con- 
fidence of the Captain was catching sometimes forgetting 
them to admire the splendors of the night in the tropics. 
My remembrances went to France, in the strain of those 
zodiacal stars that would shine in some hours' time. The 
moon shone in the midst of the constellations of the 
zenith. 

The night slipped away without any mischance, the 
islanders frightened, no doubt, at the sight of a mon- 
ster aground in the bay. The panels were open, and 
would have offered an easy access to the interior of the 
Nautilus. 

At six o'clock in the morning of the 8th of January I 
went up on to the platform. The dawn was breaking. 
The island soon showed itself through the dissipating fogs 
first the shore then the summits. 

The natives were there, more numerous than on the day 
before 500 or 600 perhaps. Some of them, profiting by 
the low water, had come on to the coral at less than two 
cable-lengths from the Nautilus. I distinguished them 



80,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 11&amp; 

easily; they were true Papuans, with athletic figures; men 
of good race, large high foreheads large, but not broad, 
and flat and white teeth. Their woolly hair, with a red- 
dish tinge, showed off on their black, shining bodies like 
those of the Nubians. From the lobes of their ears, cut 
and distended, hung chnplets of bones. Most of these 
savages were naked. Amongst them I remarked some 
women dressed from the hips to the knees in quite a crin- 
oline of herbs that sustained a vegetable waistband. Some 
chiefs had ornamented their necks with a crescent and 
collars of glass beads, red and white; nearly all were armed 
with bows, arrows, and shields, and carried on their 
shoulders a sort of net containing those round stones which 
they cast from their slings with great skill. One of these 
chiefs, rather near to the Nautilus, examined it attentive- 
ly. He was, perhaps, a "mado" of high rank, for he war 
draped in a mat of banana leaves notched round the edges 
and set off with brilliant colors. 

I could easily have knocked down this native, who was 
within a short length; but I thought that it was better to 
wait for real hostile demonstrations. Between Europeans 
and savages it is proper for the Europeans to parry sharply, 
not to attack. 

During low water the natives roamed about near the 
Nautilus, but were not troublesome. I heard them fre- 
quently repeat the word " Assai," and by their gestures I 
understood that they invited me to go on land, an invita- 
tion that I declined. 

So that, on that day, the boat did not push off, to the 
great displeasure of Master Land, who could not complete 
his provisions. 

This adroit Canadian employed his time in preparing 
the viands and meat that he had brought off the island. 
As for the savages, they returned to the shore about-eleven 
o'clock in the morning, as soon as the coral tops began to 
disappear under the rising tide; but I saw their numbers 
had increased considerably on the shore. Probably they 
came from the neighboring islands, or very likely from 
Papua. However, I had not seen a single native canoe. 
Having nothing better to do, I thought of dragging these 
beautiful limpid waters, under which I saw a profusion of 
shells, zoophytes, and marine plants. Moreover, it was 
the last day that the Nautilus would pass in these parts, 



120 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

if it float in open sea the next day, according to Captain 
Nemo's promise. 

I therefore called Conseil, who brought me a little light 
drag, very like those for the oyster-fishery, Now to work! 
For two hours we fished unceasingly, but without bringing 
up any rarities. The drag was filled with midas-ears, 
harps, melames, and particularly the most beautiful ham- 
mers I have ever seen. We also brought up some holo- 
thurias, pearl-oysters, and a dozen little turtles, that were 
reserved for the pantry on board. 

But just when I expected it least, I put my hand on a 
wonder, I might say a natural deformity, very rarely met 
with. Conseil Was just dragging, and his net came up 
filled with divers ordinary shells, when, all at once, he saw 
me plunge my arm quickly into the net, to draw out a 
shell, and heard me utter a conchological cry, that is to 
say, the most piercing cry that human throat can utter. 

" What is the matter, sir?" he asked, in surprise; " has 
master been bitten?" 

" No, my boy; but I would willingly have given a finger 
for my discovery." 

" What discovery?" 

" This shell," I said, holding up the object of my 
triumph. 

"It is simply an olive porphyry, genus olive, order of 
the pectini-branchidse, class of gasteropods, sub- class of 
mollusca." 

"Yes, Conseil; but instead of being rolled from right 
to left, this olive turns from left to right." 

" Is it possible?" 

"Yes, my boy; it is a left-handed shell." 

Shells are all right-handed, with rare exceptions; and 
when by chance their spiral is left, amateurs are ready to 
pay their weight in gold. 

Conseil and I were absorbed in the contemplation of our 
treasure, and I was promising myself to enrich the mu- 
seum with it, when a stone, unfortunately thrown by a 
native, struck against and broke the precious object in 
Conseil's hand. I uttered a cry of despair! Conseil took 
up his gun, and aimed at a savage who was poising ht&amp; 
sling at ten yards from him. I would have stopped him, 
but his blow took effect, and. broke the bracelet of amulets 
which encircled the arm of the savage. 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 121 

"Conseil!" cried I; "Conseill" 

" Well, sir, do you not see that the cannibal has com- 
menced the attack?" 

"The shell is not worth the life of a man," said I. 

"Ah! the scoundrel!" cried Conseil; "I would rather 
he had broken my shoulder!" 

Conseil was in earnest, but I was not of his opinion. 
However, the situation had been changed some minutes 
before, and we had not perceived. A score of canoes sur- 
rounded the Nautilus. These canoes, scooped out of the 
trunk of a tree, long, narrow, well adapted for speed, 
were balanced by means of a long bamboo pole, which 
floated on the water. They were managed by skillful, 
half-naked paddlers, and I watched their advance with 
some uneasiness. It was evident that these Papuans had 
already had dealings with the Europeans, and knew their 
ships. But this long iron cylinder anchored in the bay, 
without masts or chimney, what could they think of it? 
Nothing good, for at first they kept at a respectful dis- 
tance. However, seeing it motionless, by degrees they 
took courage and sought to familiarize themselves with it. 
Now this familiarity was precisely what it was necessary 
to avoid. Our arms, which were noiseless, could only 
produce a moderate effect on the savages, who have little 
respect for aught but blustering Jthings. The thunder- 
bolt without the reverberations of thunder would frighten 
man but little, though the danger lies in the lightning, 
not in the noise. 

At this moment the canoes approached the Nautilus, 
and a shower of arrows alighted on her. 

I went down to the saloon, but found no one there. I 
ventured to knock at the door that opened into the Cap- 
tain's room. "Come in," was the answer. 

I entered and found Captain Nemo deep in algebraical 
calculations of x and other quantities. 

" I am disturbing you," said I, for courtesy's sake. 

" That is true, M. Aronnax," replied the Captain, "but 
I think you have serious reasons for wishing to see me." 

"Very grave ones; the natives are surrounding us in 
their canoes, and in a few minutes we shall certainly be 
attacked by many hundreds of savages." 

"Ah!" said Captain Nemo, quietly, "they are come 
with their canoes?" 



122 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

"Yes, sir." 

"Well, sir, we must close the hatches." 
Exactly, and I came to say to you- 



" Nothing can be more simple," said Captain Nemo. 
And pressing an electric button he transmitted an order to 
the ship's crew. 

"It is all done, sir," said he, after some moments. 
" The pinnace is read}'', and the hatches are closed. You 
&lt;?k) not fear, I imagine, that these gentlemen could stave 
in walls on which the balls of your frigate have had no 
effect?" 

" No, Captain; but danger still exists." 

" What is that, sir?" 

" It is that to-morrow, at about this hour, we must 
open the hatches to renew the air of the Nautilus. Now 
if, at this moment, the Papuans should occupy the plat- 
form, I do not see how you could prevent them from 
entering." 

" Then, sir, you suppose that they will board us?" 

" I am certain of it." 

" Well, sir, let them come. I see no rsason for hinder- 
ing them. After all, these Papuans are poor creatures, 
and I am unwilling that my visit to the Island of Gue- 
beroan should cost the life of a single one of these 
wretches." 

Upon that I was going away; but Captain Nemo de- 
tained me, and asked me to sit down by him. He ques- 
tioned me with interest about our excursions on shore, and 
our hunting, and seemed not to understand the craving 
for meat that possessed the Canadian. Then the conver- 
sation turned on various subject?, and without being more 
communicative, Captain Nemo showed himself more ami- 
able. 

Amongst other things, we happened to speak of the 
situation of the Nautilus, run aground in exactly the same 
spot in this strait where Dumont d'Urville was nearly lost. 
Apropos of this: 

" This D'Urville was one of your great sailors," said 
the Captain tome: "one of your most intelligent navi- 
gators. He is the Captain Cook of you Frenchmen. Un- 
fortunate man of science, after having braved the icebergs 
of the south pole, the coral reefs of Oceanica, the canni- 
bals of the Pacific, to perish miserably in a railway train! 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 123 

If this energetic man could have reflected during the last 
moments of his life, what must have been uppermost in 
his last thoughts, do you suppose?" 

So speaking, Captain Nemo seemed moved, and his 
emotion gave me a better opinion of him. Then, chart in 
hand, we reviewed the travels of the French navigator, his 
voyages of circumnavigation, his double detention at the 
south pole, which led. to the discovery of Adelaide and 
Louis Philippe, and fixing the hydrographical bearings of 
the principal islands of Oceanica. 

" That which your D'Urville has done on the surface of 
the seas," said Captain Nemo, "that have I done under 
them, and more easily, more completely than he. The 
Astrolabe and the Celia, incessantly tossed about by the 
hurricanes, could not be worth the Nautilus, quiet reposi- 
tory of labor that she is, truly motionless in the midst of 
the waters." 

" To-morrow," added the Captain, rising, "to-morrow, 
at twenty minutes to three P.M., the Nautilus shall float, 
and leave the Strait of Torres uninjured. v 

Having curtly pronounced these words, Captain Nemo 
bowed slightly. This was to dismiss me, and I went back 
to my room. 

There I found Conseil, who wished to know the result 
of my interview with the Captain. 

" My boy," said I, " when I feigned to believe that his 
Nautilus was threatened by the natives of Papua, the Cap- 
tain answered me very sarcastically. I have but one 
thing to say to you: Have confidence in him, and go to 
sleep in peace." 

" Have you no need of my services, sir?" 

"No, my friend. What is Ned Land doing?" 

" If you will excuse me, sir," answered Couseil, "friend 
Ned is busy making a kangaroo-pie, which will be a mar- 
vel." 

I remained alone, and went to bed, but slept indiffer- 
ently. I heard the noise of the savages, who stamped on. 
the platform, uttering deafening cries. The night passed 
thus, without disturbing the ordinary repose of the crew. 
The presence of these cannibals affected them no more 
than the soldiers of a masked battery care for the ants that 
crawl over its front. 

At six in the morning I rose. The hatches had not been 



124 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

opened. The inner air was not renewed, but the reser- 
voirs, filled ready for any emergency, were now resorted 
to, and discharged several cubic feet of oxygen into the 
exhausted atmosphere of the Nautilus. 

I worked in my room till noon, without having seen 
Captain Nemo, even for an instant. On board no prepa- 
rations for departure were visible. 

I waited for some time, then went into the large saloon. 
The clock marked half past two. In ten minutes it would 
be high tide, and if Captain Nemo had not made a rash 
promise, the Nautilus would be immediately detached. If 
not, many months would pass ere she could leave her bed 
of coral. 

However, some warning vibrations began to be felt in 
the vessel. I heard the keel grating against the rough, 
calcareous bottom of the coral-reef. 

At five-and-twenty minutes to three Captain Nemo ap- 
peared in the saloon. 

" We are going to start," said he. 

" Ah!" replied I. 

" I have given the order to open the hatches." 
'And the Papuans?" 

' The Papuans?" answered Captain Nemo, slightly 
shrugging his shoulders. 

' Will they not come inside the Nautilus?" 

'How?" 

'Only by leaping over the hatches you have opened." 

" M. Aronnax," quietly answered Captain Nemo, " they 
will not enter the hatches of the Nautilus in that way, 
even if they were open." 

I looked at the Captain. 

" You do not understand?" said he. 

" Hardly." 

" Well, come and you will see." 

I directed my steps toward the central staircase. There 
Ned Land and Conseil were slyly watching some of the 
ship's crew, who were opening the hatches, while cries of 
rage and fearful vociferations resounded outside. 

The port lids were pulled down outside. Twenty hor- 
rible faces appeared. But the first native who placed hia 
hand on the stair-rail, struck from behind by some invisi- 
ble force, I know not what, fled, uttering the most fearful 
cries, and making the wildest contortions. 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 125 

Ten of his companions followed him. They met with 
the same fate. 

Conseil was in ecstasy. Ned Land, carried away by his 
violent instincts, rushed on to the staircase. But the mo- 
ment he seized the rail with both hands, he, in his turn, 
was overthrown, 

"I am struck by a thunderbolt," cried he, with an 
oath. 

This explained all. It was no rail, but a metallic cable, 
charged with electricity from the deck, communicating 
with the platform. Whoever touched it felt a powerful 
shock and this shock would have been mortal, if Captain 
Nemo had discharged into the conductor the whole force 
of the current. It might truly be said that between his 
assailants and himself he had stretched a network of elec- 
tricity which none could pass with impunity. 

Meanwhile, the exasperated Papuans had beaten a re- 
treat, paralyzed with terror. As for us, half laughing, 
we consoled and rubbed the unfortunate Ned Land, who 
swore like one possessed. 

But, at this moment, the Nautilus, raised by the last 
waves of the tide, quitted her coral bed exactly at the 
fortieth minute fixed by the captain. Her screws swept 
the water slowly and majestically. Her speed increased 
gradually, and sailing on the surface of the ocean, she 
quitted safe and sound the dangerous passes of the Straits 
of Torres. 



