CHAPTER XII. 

CACHALOTS AND WHALES. 

DURING the nights of the 13th and 14th of March, the 
Nautilus returned to its southerly course. I fancied that, 
when on a level with Cape Horn, he would turn the helm 



214 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

westward, in order to beat the Pacific seas, and so com- 
plete the tour of the world. He did nothing of the kind, 
.but continued on his way to the southern regions. Where 
was he going to? To the pole? It was madness! I began 
to think that the captain's temerity justified Ned Land's 
fears. For some time past the Canadian had not spoken 
to me of his projects of flight, he was less communicative, 
almost silent. I could see that this lengthened imprison- 
ment was weighing upon him, ami I felt that rage was 
burning within him, When he met the captain, his eyes 
lit up with suppressed anger; and I feared that his nat- 
ural violence would lead him into some extreme. That 
day, the 14th of March, Consoil and he came to me in my 
room. I inquired the cause of their visit. 

"A simple question to ask you, sir," replied the Cana- 
dian. 

" Speak, Ned." 

." How many men are there on board the Nautilus, do 
you think?" 

" I cannot tell, my friend." 

' ' 1 should say that its working does not require a large 
crew." 

" Certainly, under existing conditions, ten men, at the 
most, ought to be enough." 

" Well, why should there be any more?" 

"Why?" I replied, looking fixedly at Ned Land, whose 
meaning was easy to guess. " Because," I added, " if my 
surmises are correct, and if I have well understood the 
captain's existence, the Nautilus is not only a vessel, it is 
also a place of refuge for those who, like its commander, 
have broken every tie upon earth." 

" Perhaps so," said Conseil; " but, in any case, the 
Nautilus can only contain a certain number of men. 
Could not you, sir, estimate their maximum?" 

"How, Conseil?" 

"By calculation; given the size of the vessel, which 
you know, sir } and consequently the quantity of air it 
contains, knowing also how much each man expends at a 
breath, and comparing these results with the fact that the 
Nautilus is obliged to go to the surface every twenty-four 
hours." 

Conseil had not finished the sentence before I saw what 
he was driving at. 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 215 

" I understand," said I, " but that calculation, though 
simple enough, can give but a very uncertain result." 

" Never mind," said Ned Land, urgently. 

" Here it is, then,"said I. "In one hour each man con- 
sumes the oxygen contained in twenty gallons of air; and 
in twenty-four, that contained in 480 gallons. We must, 
therefore, find how many times 480 gallons of air the Nau- 
tilus contains." 

" Just so," said Couseil. 

"Or," I continued, "the size of the Nautilus being 
1,500 tons, and one ton holding 200 gallons, it contains 
300,000 gallons of air, which, divided by 480 gives a quo- 
tient of 625. Which means to say, strictly speaking, that 
the air contained in the Nautilus would suffice for 625 
men for twenty-four hours." 

"Six hundred and twenty-five!" repeated Ned. 

" But remember that all of us, passengers, sailors, and 
officers included, would not form a tenth part of that 
number." 

"Still too many for three men," murmured Conseil. 

The Canadian shook his head, passed his hand across 
his forehead, and left the room without answering. 

'' Will you allow me to make one observation, sir?" said 
Conseil. " Poor Ned is longing for everything that he 
cannot hare. His past life is always present to him; every- 
thing that we are forbidden he regrets. His head is full 
of old recollections. And we must understand him. What 
has he to do here? Nothing; he is not -learned like you, 
sir; and has not the same taste for the beauties of the sea 
that we have. He* would risk everything to be able to go 
once more into a tavern in his own country." 

Certainly the monotony on board must seem intolerable 
to the Canadian, accustomed as he was to a life of liberty 
and activity. Events were rare which could rouse him 
to any show of spirit; but that day an event did happen 
which recalled the bright days of the harpooner. About 
eleven in the morning, being on the surface of the ocean, 
the Nautilus fell in with a troop of whales an encounter 
which did not astonish me, knowing that these creatures, 
hunted to the death, had taken refuge in high latitudes. 
We were seated on the platform with a quiet sea. The 
month of March in those latitudes gave us some lovely 
autumnal days. It was the Canadian he could not be 



216 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

mistaken who signaled a whale on the eastern horizon. 
Looking attentively,, one might see its black back rise and 
fall with the waves five miles from the Nautilus. 

"Ah!" exclaimed Ned Land, "if I was on board a 
whaler now, such a meeting would give me pleasure. It 
is one of large size. See with what strength its blow-holes 
throw up columns of air and steam! Confound it, why 
am I bound to these steel plates?" 

"What, Ned," said I, "you have not forgotten your 
old ideas of fishing?" 

" Can a whale-fisher ever forget his old trade, sir? Can 
he ever tire of the emotions caused by such a chase?" 

" You have never fished in these seas, Ned?" 

"Never, sir; in the northern only, and as much in 
Behring as in Davis Straits." 

" Then the southern whale is still unknown to you. It 
is the Greenland whale you have hunted up to this time, 
and that would not risk passing through the warm waters 
of the equator. Whales are localized according to their 
kinds, in certain seas which they never leave. And if one 
of these creatures went from Behring to Davis Straits, it 
must be simply because there is a passage from one sea to 
the other, either on the American or the Asiatic sides." 

" In that case, as I have never fished in these seas, I do 
not know the kind of whale frequenting them." 

"I have told you, Ned." 

" A greater reason for making their acquaintance/' said 
Con sell. 

"Look! look!" exclaimed the Canadian, "they ap- 
proach; they aggravate me; they know that I cannot get 
at them!" 

Ned stamped his feet. His hand trembled, as he 
grasped an imaginary harpoon. 

"Are these cetacea as large as those of the northern 
seas?" asked he. 

"Very nearly, Ned." 

" Because I have seen large whales, sir, whales meas- 
uring a hundred feet. I have even been told that those 
of Hullamoch and Umgallick, of the Aleutian Islands, are 
sometimes a hundred and fifty feet long." 

"* That seems to me exaggeration. These creatures are 
only balsenopterons, provided with dorsal finsj and, like 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 217 

the cachalots, are generally much smaller than the Green- 
land whale." 

" Ah!" exclaimed the Canadian, whose eyes had never 
left the ocean, "they are coming nearer; they are in the 
same water as the Nautilus!" 

Then returning to the conversation, he said: 

" You spoke of the cachalot as a small creature. 1 have 
heard of gigantic ones. They are intelligent cetacea. It 
is said of some that they cover themselves with sea-weed 
and fucus, and then are taken for islands. People encamp 
upon them, and settle there; light a fire " 

" And build houses," said Conseil. 

"Yes, joker," said Ned Land. " And one fine day the 
creature plunges, carrying with it all the inhabitants to 
the bottom of the sea." 

" Something like the travels of Sindbad the Sailor," I 
replied, laughing. 

" Ah!" suddenly exclaimed Ned Land, "it is not one 
whale; there are ten there are twenty it is a whole 
troop! And I not able to do anything! hands and feet 
tied!" 

"But, friend Ned," said Conseil, " why do you not ask 
Captain Nemo's permission to chase them?" 

Conseil had not finished his sentence when Ned Land 
had lowered himself through the panel to seek the Cap- 
tain. A few minutes afterward the two appeared together 
on the platform. 

Captain Nemo watched the troop of cetacea playing on 
the waters about a mile from the Nautilus. 

"They are southern whales," said he; "there goes the 
fortune of a whole fleet of whalers." 

"Well, sir," asked the Canadian, "can 1 not chase 
them if only to remind me of my old trade of harpooner?" 

" And to what purpose?" replied Captain Nemo; " only 
to destroy! We have nothing to do with whale-oil on 
board." 

"But, sir," continued the Canadian, "in the Eed Sea 
you allowed us to follow the dugong." 

" Then it was to procure fresh meat for my crew. Here 
it would be killing for killing's sake. I know that is a 
privilege reserved for man, but 1 do not approve of such 
murderous pastime. In destroying the southern whale 
(like the Greenland whale, an inoffensive o.reature), your 



218 , 20,000 LEAGUES UKDUR THE SEAS. 

traders do a culpable action, Master Land. They have 
already depopulated the whole of Baffin's Bay, and are 
annihilating a class of useful animals. Leave the unfort- 
unate cetacea alone. They have plenty of natural ene- 
mies cachalots, sword-fish, and saw-fish without your 
troubling them." 

The captain was right. The barbarous and incon- 
siderate greed of these fishermen will one day cause the 
disappearance of the last whale in the ocean. Ned Land 
whistled ' ' Yankee Doodle " between his teeth, thrust his 
hands into his pockets, and turned his back upon us. But 
Captain Nemo watched the troop of cetacea, and address- 
ing me said: 

" I was right in saying that whales had natural enemies 
enough, without counting man. These will have plenty 
to do before long. Do you see, M. Aronnax, about eight 
miles to leeward, those blackish moving points?" 

" Yes, Captain," I replied. 

" Those are cachalots terrible animals, which I have 
sometimes met in troops of two or three hundred. As to 
those, they are cruel, mischievous creatures; they would 
be right in exterminating them." 

The Canadian turned quickly at the last words. 

" Well, Captain," said he, " it is still time, in the in- 
terest of the whales." 

" It is useless to expose one's self, Professor. The Nau- 
tilus will disperse them. It is armed with a steel spur as 
good as Master Land's harpoon, I imagine." 

The Canadian did not put himself out enough to shrug 
his shoulders. Attack cetacea with blows of a spur! Who 
had ever heard of such a thing? 

" Wait, M. Aronnax," said Captain Nemo. "We will 
show you something you have never yet seen. We have 
no pity for these ferocious creatures. They are nothing 
but mouth and teeth." 

Mouth and teeth! No one could better describe the 
macrocephalous cachalot, which is sometimes more than 
seventy-five feet long. Its enormous head occupies one- 
third of its entire body. Better armed than the whale, 
whose upper jaw is furnished only with whalebone, it is 
supplied with twenty-five large tusks, about eight inches 
long, cylindrical and conical at the top, each weighing 
two pounds. It is the upper part of this enormous head, 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 219 

in great cavities divided by cartilages, that is to be found 
from six to eight hundred pounds of that precious oil 
called spermaceti. The cachalot is a disagreeable creat- 
ure, more tadpole than fish, according to Fredol's descrip- 
tion. It is badly formed, the whole of its left side being 
(if we may say it) a "failure," and being only able to see 
with -its right eye. But the formidable troop was nearing 
us. They had seen the whales and were preparing to at- 
tack them. One could judge beforehand that the cacha- 
lots would be victorious, not only because they were better 
built for attack than their inoffensive adversaries, but 
also because they could remain longer under water 
without coming to the surface. There was only just time 
to go to the help of the whales. The Nautilus went under 
water. Conseil, Ned Land, and I took 4 our places before 
the window in the saloon, and Captain Nemo joined the 
pilot in his cage to work his apparatus as an engine of de- 
struction. Soon I felt the beatings of the screw quicken, 
and our speed increased. The battle between the cachalots 
and the whales had already begun when the Nautilus ar- 
rived. They did not at first show any fear at the sight of 
this new monster joining in the conflict. But they soon 
had to guard against its blows. What a battle! The Nau- 
tilus was nothing but a formidable harpoon, brandished 
by the hand of its captain. It hurled itself against the 
fleshy mass, passing through from one part to the other, 
leaving behind it two quivering halves of the animal. It 
could not feel the formidable blows from their tails upon 
its sides, nor the shock which it produced itself, much 
more. One cachalot killed, it ran at the next, tacked on 
the spot that it might not miss its prey, going forward 
and backward, answering to its helm, plunging when the 
cetacean dived into the deep waters, coming up with it 
when it returned to the surface, striking it front or side- 
ways, cutting or tearing in all directions, and at any pace, 
piercing it with its terrible spur. What carnage! What 
a noise on the surface of the waves! What sharp hissing, 
and what snorting peculiar to these enraged animals! In 
the midst of these waters generally so peaceful their tails 
made perfect billows. For one hour this wholesale mas- 
sacre continued, from which the cachalots could not escape. 
Several times ten or twelve united tried to crush the Nau- 
tilus by their weight. From the window we could see 



220 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

their enormous mouths studded with tusks, and their 
formidable eyes. Ned Land could not contain himself, he 
threatened and swore at them. We could feel them cling- 
ing to our vessel like dogs worrying a wild boar in a copse. 
But the Nautilus, working its screw, carried them here 
and there, or to the upper levels of the ocean, without 
caring for their enormous weight, nor the powerful strain 
on the vessel. At length, the mass of cachalots broke up, 
the waves became quiet, and I felt that we were rising to 
the surface. The panel opened, and we hurried on to the 
platform. The sea was covered with mutilated bodies. A 
formidable explosion could not have divided and torn this 
fleshy mass with more violence. We were floating amid 
gigantic bodies, bluish on the back and white underneath, 
covered with enormous protuberances. Some terrified 
cachalots were flying toward the horizon. The waves were 
dyed red for several miles, and the Nautilus floated in a 
sea of blood. Captain Nemo joined us. 

" Well, Master Land?" said he. 

" Well, sir," replied the Canadian, whose enthusiasm 
had somewhat calmed; " it is a terrible spectacle certainly. 
But I am not a butcher. I am a hunter, and I call this a 
butchery." 

" It is a massacre of mischievous creatures," replied the 
captain; "and the Nautilus is not a butcher's knife." 

" I like my harpoon better," said the Canadian. 

"Every one to his own," answered the captain, looking 
fixedly at Ned Land. 

I feared he would commit some act of violence, which 
would end in sad consequences. But his anger was turned 
by the sight of a whale which the Nautilus had just come 
up with. The creature had not quite escaped from the 
cachalot's teeth. I recognized the southern whale by its 
flat head, which is entirely black. Anatomically, it is 
distinguished from the white whale and the North Cape 
whale by the seven cervical vertebrae, and it has two more 
ribs than its congeners. The unfortunate cetacean was 
lying on its side, riddled with holes from the bites, and 
quite dead. From its mutilated fin still hung a young 
whale which it could not save from the massacre. Its 
open mouth let the water flow in and out, murmuring like 
the waves breaking on the shore. Captain Nemo steered 
close to the corpse of the creature. Two of his meii 



^&gt; 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 221 

mounted its side, and I saw, not without surprise, that 
they were drawing from its breasts all the milk which they 
contained, that is to say, about two or three tons. The 
captain offered me a cup of the milk, which was still warm. v 
I could not help showing my repugnance to the drink;' 
but he assured me that it was excellent, and not to be dis- 
tinguished from cow's milk. I tasted it, and was of his 
opinion. It was a useful reserve to us, for in the shape of 
s:ilt butter or cheese it would form an agreeable variety 
from our ordinary food. From that day I noticed with 
uneasiness that Ned Land's ill-will toward Captain Nemo 
increased, and I resolved to watch the Canadian's gestures 
closely. 



