CHAPTER XVII. 

UNDER THE PACIFIC. 

THE next morning, the 18th of November, I had quite 
recovered from my fatigues of the day before, and I went 
up on to the platform, just as the second lieutenant was 
uttering his daily phrase. 

I was admiring the magnificent aspect of the ocean when 
Captain Nemo appeared. He did not seem to be aware of 
my presence, and began a series of astronomical observa- 
tions. Then, when he had finished, he went and leant'on 
the cage of the watch-light, and gazed abstractedly on the 
ocean. In the meantime, a number of the sailors of the 
Nautilus, all strong and healthy men, had come up on to 
the platform. They came to draw up the nets that had 
been laid all night. These sailors were evidently of differ- 
ent nations, although the European type was visible in all 
of them. I recognized some unmistakable Irishmen, 
Frenchmen, some Sclaves, and a Greek or a Candiote. 
They were civil, and only used that odd language among 
themselves, the origin of which I could not guess, neither 
could I question them. 

The nets were hauled in. They were a large kind of 
"chaluts," like those on the Normandy coasts, great pock- 
ets that the. waves and a chain fixed in the smaller meshes, 



&amp;2 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

kept open. These pockets, drawn by iron poles, swept 
through the water, and gathered in everything in their 
way. That day they brought up curious specimens from 
those productive coasts fishing-frogs that, from their 
comical movements, have acquired the name of buffoons; 
black commersons, furnished with antennae; trigger-fish, 
encircled with red bands; orthragorisci, with very subtle 
venom; some olive-colored lampreys; macrorhynci, cov- 
ered with silvery scales; trichiuri, the electric power of 
which is equal to that of the gymnotus and cramp-fish; 
scaly no.topteri, with transverse brown bands; greenish 
cod; several varieties of gobies, etc., also some larger fish; 
a caranx with a prominent head a yard long; several fine 
bonitos, streaked with blue and silver; and three splendid 
tunnies, which, spite of the swiftness of their motion, had 
not escaped the net. 

I reckoned that the haul had brought in more than nine 
hundred weight of fish. It was a fine haul, but not to be 
wondered at. Indeed, the nets are let down for several 
hours, and inclose in their meshes an infinite variety. 
We had no lack of excellent food, and the rapidity of the 
Nautilus and the attraction of the electric light could al- 
ways renew our supply. These several productions of the 
sea were immediately lowered through the panel to the 
steward's room, some to be eaten fresh, and others 
pickled. 

The fishing ended, the provision of air renewed, I 
thought that the Nautilus was about to continue its sub- 
marine excursion, and was preparing to return to my 
room, when, without further preamble, the captain turned 
to me, saying: 

" Professor, is not this ocean gifted with real life? It 
lias its tempers and its gentle moods. Yesterday it slept 
as we did, and now it has woke after a quiet night. 
Look!" he continued, " it wakes under the caresses of 
the sun. It is going to renew its diurnal existence. It is 
an interesting study to watch the play of its organization. 
It has a pulse, arteries, spasms; and I agree with the 
learned Maury, who discovered in it a circulation as real 
as the circulation of blood in animals. 

"Yes, the ocean has indeed circulation, and to promote 
it the Creator has caused things to multiply in it caloric, 
salt, animalculae." &gt; 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 93 

When Captain Nemo spoke thns, he seemed altogether 
changed, and aroused an extraordinary emotion in me. 

"Also," he added, "true existence is there; and I can 
imagine the foundations of nautical towns, clusters of 
submarine houses, which, like the Nautilus, would ascend 
every morning to breathe at the surface of the water 
free towns, independent cities. Yet who knows whether 
some despot " 

Captain Nemo finished his sentence with a violent gest- 
ure. Then, addressing me as if to chase away some sor- 
rowful thought " M. Aronnax," he asked, " do you know 
the depth of the ocean?" 

"I only know, Captain, what the principal soundings 
have taught us." 

" Could you tell me them, so that I can suit them to 
my purpose?" 

" These are some," I replied, " that I remember. If 
I am not mistaken, a depth of 8,000 yards has been found 
in the North Atlantic, and 2,500 yards in the Mediter- 
ranean. The most remarkable soundings have been made 
in the South Atlantic, near the 35th parallel, and they 
gave 12,000 yards, 14,000 yards, and 15,000 yards. To 
sum up all, it is reckoned that if the bottom of the sea 
were leveled, its mean depth would be about one and 
three-quarter leagues." 

" Well, Professor," replied the Captain, " we shall 
show you better than that, I hope. As to the mean 
depth of this part of the Pacific, I tell you it is only 4,000 
yards." 

Having said this, Captain Nemo went toward the 
panel, and disappeared down the ladder. I followed him, 
and went into the large drawing-room. The screw was 
immediately put in motion, and the log gave twenty miles 
an hour. 

During the days and weeks that passed, Captain Nemo 
was very sparing of his visits. I seldom saw him. The 
lieutenant picked the ship's course regularly on the chart, 
so I could always tell exactly the route of the Nautilus. 

Nearly every day, for some time, the panels of the 
drawing-room were opened, and we were never tired of 
penetrating the mysteries of the submarine world. 

The general direction of the Nautilus was southeast, 
and it kept between 100 and 150 yards of depth. One 



94 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

day, however, I do not know why, being drawn diag- 
onally by means of the inclined planes, it touched the 
bed of the sea. The thermometer indicated a tempera- 
ture of 4.25 (cent.); a temperature that at this depth 
seemed common to all latitudes. 

At three o'clock on the morning of the 26th of No- 
rember, the Nautilus crossed the tropic of Cancer at 112 
longitude. On the 27th instant it sighted the Sandwich 
Islands, where Cook died, February 14, 1779. We had 
then gone 4,860 leagues from our starting-point. In the 
morning, when I went on the platform, I saw two miles 
to windward, Hawaii, the largest of the seven islands that 
form the group. I saw clearly the cultivated ranges, and 
the several mountain chains that run parallel with the 
side, and the volcanoes that overtop Mount-Rea, which 
rise 5,000 yards above the level of the sea. Besides other 
things the nets brought up, were several flabellariae and 
graceful polypi, that are peculiar to that part of the ocean. 
The direction of the Nautilus was still to the southeast. 
It crossed the equator December 1, in 142 longtitude; and 
on the 4th of the same month, after crossing rapidly and 
without anything particular occurring, we sighted the 
Marquesas group. 1 saw, three miles off, at 8 57' latitude 
south, and 139 32' west longitude, Martin's beak in 
Nouka-Hiva, the largest of the group that belongs to 
France. I only saw the woody mountains against the 
horizon, because Captain Nemo did not wish to bring the 
ship to the wind. There the nets brought up beautiful 
specimens of fish choryphenes, with azure fins and tails 
like gold, the flesh of which is unrivaled, hologymnoses, 
nearly destitude of scales, but of exquisite flavor; os- 
torhyncs, with the bony jaws, and yellow-tinged thasards, 
as good as bonitos; all fish that would be of use to us. 
After leaving these charming islands protected by the 
French flag, from the 4th to the llth of December, the 
Nautilus sailed over about 2,000 miles. This navigation 
was remarkable for the meeting with an immense shoal of 
calmars, near neighbors to the cuttle. The French fish- 
ermen called them hornets; they belong to the cepha- 
lopod class, and to the dibranchial family, that com- 
prehends the cuttles and the argonauts. These animals 
were particularly studied by the students of antiquity, and 
they furnished numerous metaphors to the popular orators, 



20,000 LEAGUES CINDER THE SEAS. 95 

as well as excellent dishes for the tables of the rich citizens, 
if one can believe AthenaBiis, a Greek doctor, who lived be- 
fore Galen. It was during the night of the 9th or 10th o-f 
December that the Nautilus came across this shoal of 
molluscs, that are peculiarly nocturnal. One could count 
them by millions. They emigrate from the temperate to 
warmer zones, following the track of the herrings and 
sardines. We watched them through the thick crystal 
panes, swimming down the wind with great rapidity, 
moving by means of their locomotive tube, pursuing fish 
and molluscs, eating the little ones, eaten by the big ones, 
and tossing about in indescribable confusion the ten arms 
that nature has placed on their heads like a crest of 
pneumatic serpents. The Nautilus, in spite of its speed, 
uailed for several hours in the midst of these animals, and 
its nets brought in an enormous quantity, among which I 
recognized the nine species that D'Orbigny classed for the 
Pacific. One saw, while crossing, that the sea displays the 
most wonderful sights. They were in endless variety. 
The scene changed continually, and we were called upon 
not only to contemplate the works of the Creator in the 
midst of the liquid element, but to penetrate the awful 
mysteries of the ocean. 

During the daytime of the llth of December, I was busy 
reading in the large drawing-room. Ned Land and Con- 
seil watched &lt;~he luminous water through the half-open 
panels. The Nautilus was immovable. While its reser- 
voirs were filled, it kept at a depth of 1,0,00 yards, a region 
rarely visited in the ocean, and in which large fish were 
seldom seen. 

I was then reading a charming book by Jean Mace, 
" The Slaves of the Stomach," and I was learning some 
valuable lessons from it, when Conseil interrupted me. 

" Will master come here a moment?" he said, in a 
curious voice. 

" What is the matter, Conseil?" 

" I want master to look." I 

I rose, went and leaned on my elbows before the panes, 
and watched. 

In a full electric light an enormous black mass, quite 
immovable, was suspended in the midst of the waters. I 
watched it attentively, seeking to find out the nature of 



96 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

this gigantic cetacean. But a sudden thought crossed my 
mind. " A vessel!" I said, half aloud. 

" Yes," replied the Canadian, " a disabled ship that has 
sunk perpendicularly." 

Ned Land was right; we were close to a vessel of which 
the tattered shrouds still hung from their chains. The 
keel seemed to be in good order, and it had been wrecked 
at most some few years. Three stumps of masts, broken 
off about two feet above the bridge, showed that the vessel 
hud had to sacrifice its masts. But, lying on its side, it 
had filled, and it was heeling over to port. This skeleton 
of what it had once been was a sad spectacle as it lay lost 
under the waves; but sadder still was the sight of the 
bridge, where some corpses, bound with ropes, were still 
lying. I counted five four men, one of whom was stand- 
ing at the helm, and a woman standing by the poop hold- 
ing an infant in her arms. She was quite young. I could 
distinguish her features, which the water had not decom- 
posed, by the brilliant light from the Nautilus. In one 
despairing effort, she had raised her infant above her head, 
poor little thing! whose arms encircled its mother's neck. 
The attitude of the four sailors was frightful, distorted as 
they were by their convulsive movements, whilst making 
a last effort to free themselves from the cords that bound 
them to the vessel. The steersman alone, calm, with a 
grave clear face, his gray hair glued to his forehead, and 
his hand clutching the wheel of the helm, seemed even 
then to be guiding the three broken masts through the 
depths of the ocean. 

What a scene! We were dumb; our hearts beat fast 
before this shipwreck, taken, as it were from life, and 
photographed in its last moments. And 1 saw already, 
coming toward it with hungry eyes, enormous' sharks 
attracted by the human flesh. 

However, the Nautilus, turning, went round the sub- 
merged vessel, and in one instant I read on the stern, 
" The Florida, Sunderland." 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE 3BA8. 97 



