CHAPTER X. 

THE MAN OF THE SEAS. 

IT was the commander of the vessel, who thus spoke. 

At these words, Ned Land rose suddenly. The stew- 
ard, nearly strangled, tottered out on a sign from his 
master; but such was the power of the commander on 
board that not a gesture betrayed the resentment which 
this man must have felt toward the Canadian. Conseil, 
interested in spite of himself, I stupefied, awaited in si- 
lence the result of this scene. 

The commander, leaning against the corner of the table, 
with his arms folded, scanned us with profound attention. 
Did he hesitate to speak? Did he regret the words 
which he had just spoken in French? One might almost 
think so. 

After some moments of silence, which not one of &lt;us 
dreamed of breaking, " Gentlemen," said he, in a calm 
and penetrating voice, " I speak French, English; Ger- 
man, and Latin equally well. I could, therefore, have 
answered you at our first interview, but I wished to know 
you first, then to reflect. The story told by each one, 
entirely agreeing in the main points, convinced me of your 
identity. I know now that chance has brought before me 
M. Pierre Aronnax, Professor of Natural History at the 
Museum of Paris, intrusted with a scientific mission abroad; 
Conseil, his servant, and Ned Land, of Canadian origin, 
harpooner on board the frigate Abraham Lincoln of the 
navy of the United States of America." 

I bowed assent. It was not a question that the com- 
mander put to me. Therefore there was no answer to be 
made. This man expressed himself with perfect ease, 
without any accent. His sentences were well turned, 
his words clear, and his fluency of speech remarkable. 
Yet I did not recognize in him a fellow-countryman. 

He continued the conversation in these terms: 

" You have doubtless thought, sir, that I have delayed 
long in paying you this second visit. The reason is that, 
your identity recognized, I wished to weigh maturely what 
part to act toward you. I have hesitated much. Most 



48 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

annoying circumstances have brought you into the presence 
of a man who has broken all the ties of humanity. You 
have come to trouble my existence." 

"Unintentionally!" said I. 

"Unintentionally?" replied the stranger, raising his 
voice a little; " was it unintentionally that the Abraham 
Lincoln pursued me all over the seas? Was it uninten- 
tionally that you took passage in this frigate? Was it 
unintentionally that your cannon-balls rebounded off the 
plating of my vessel? Was it unintentionally that Mr. 
Ned Land struck me with his harpoon?" 

I detected a restrained irritation in these words. But 
to these recriminations I had a very natural answer to 
make, and I made it. 

" Sir," said I, " no doubt you are ignorant of the dis- 
cussions which have taken place concerning you in Amer- 
ica and Europe. You do not know that divers accidents, 
caused by collisions with your submarine machine, have 
excited public feeling in the two continents. I omit the 
hypotheses without number by which it was sought to 
explain the inexplicable phenomenon of which you alone 
possess the secret. But you must understand that, in 
pursuing you over the high seas of the Pacific, the Abraham 
Lincoln believed itself to be chasing some powerful sea- 
monster, of which it was necessary to rid the ocean at any 
price." 

A half-smile curled the lips of the commander: then, in 
a calmer tone: 

" M. Aronnax," he replied, " dare you affirm that your 
frigate would not as soon have pursued and cannonaded a 
submarine boat as a monster?" 

This question embarrassed me, for certainly Captain 
Farragut might not have hesitated. He might have 
thought it his duty to destroy a contrivance of this kind, 
as he would a gigantic narwhal. 

" You understand then, sir," continued the stranger, 
" that I have the right to treat you as enemies?" 

I answered nothing, purposely. For what good would 
it be to discuss such a proposition, when force could 
destroy the best arguments? 

" I have hesitated for some time," continued the com- 
mander; " nothing obliged me to show you hospitality. 
If I choose to separate myself from you, I should have no 



20,000 LEAGUES UHDER THE SEAS. 49 

interest in seeing you again; I could place you upon the 
deck of this vessel which has served you as a refuge. I 
could sink beneath the waters, and forget that you had 
ever existed. Would not that be my right?" 

" It might be the right of the savage, " I answered, 
" but not that of a civilized man." 

" Professor," replied the commander, quickly, " I am 
not what you call a civilized man! I have done with 
society entirely, for reasons which I alone have the right 
of appreciating. I do not therefore obey its laws, and I 
desire you never to allude to them before me again!" 

This was said plainly. A flash of anger and disdain 
kindled in the eyes of the Unknown, ani I had a glimpse 
of a terrible past in the life of this man. Not only had he 
put himself beyond the pale of human laws, but he had 
made himself independent of them, free in the strictest 
acceptation of the word, quite beyond their reach! Who 
then would dare to pursue him at the bottom of the sea, 
when, on its surface, he defied all attempts made against 
him? What vessel could resist the shook of his submarine 
monitor? What cuirass, however thick, could withstand 
the blows of his spur? No man could demand from him 
an account of his action; God, if he believed in one his 
conscience, if he had one were the sole judges to whom he 
was answerable. 

These reflections crossed my mind rapidly, whilst the 
strange personage was silent, absorbed, and as if wrapped 
up in himself. I regarded him with fear mingled with 
interest, as, doubtless, CEdipus regarded the Sphinx. 

After rather a long silence, the commander resumed the 
conversation. 

" I have hesitated," said he, " but I have thought that 
my interest might be reconciled with that pity to which 
every human being has a right. You will remain on board 
my vessel, since fate has cast you there. You will be free; 
and in exchange for this liberty I shall only impose one 
single condition. Your word of honor to submit to it will 
suffice." 

" Speak, sir," I answered. " I suppose this condition 
is one which a man of honor may accept?" 

" Yes, sir; it is this. It is possible that certain events, 
unforeseen, may oblige me to consign you to your cabins 
for some hours or some days, as the case may be. As I 



50 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

desire never to use violence, I expect from you, more than 
all the others, a passive obedience. In thus acting, I take 
all the responsibility; I acquit you entirely, for I make it 
an impossibility for you to see what ought not to be seen. 
Do you accept this condition?" 

Then things took place on board which, to say the least, 
were singular, and which ought not to be seen by people 
who were not placed beyond the pale of social laws. 
Amongst the surprises which the future was preparing for 
me, this might not be the least. 

"We accept," I answered; "only I will ask your 
permission, sir, to address one question to you one 
only." 

' Speak, sir." 

' You said that we should be free on board." 
' Entirely." 

' I ask you, then, what you mean b. this liberty?" 
' Just the liberty to go, to come, to see, to observe even 
all that passes here save under rare circumstances the 
liberty, in short, which we enjoy ourselves, my companions 
and L" 

It was evident that we did not understand one another. 

"Pardon me, sir," I resumed, "but this liberty is only 
what every prisoner has of pacing his prison. It cannot 
suffice us." 

" It must suffice you, however." 

" What! we must renounce forever seeing our country, 
our friends, our relations again?" 

" Yes, sir. But to renounce that unendurable worldly 
yoke which men believe to be liberty is not, perhaps, so 
painful as you think." 

" Well," exclaimed Ned Land, " never will I give my 
word of honor not to try to escape." 

"I did not ask you for your word of honor, Master 
Land," answered the commander, coldly. 

"Sir," I replied, beginning, to get angry in spite of 
myself, "you abuse your situation toward us; it is 
cruelty." 

" No, sir, it is clemency. You are my prisoners of war. 
I keep you, when I could, by a word, plunge you into th* 
depths of the ocean. You attacked me. You came to 
surprise a secret which no man in the world mucl pene- 
trate the secret of my whole existence. And you think 



20,000 LEAGUES giSDEK THE SEAS. 51 

that I am going to send you back to that world which 
must know me no more? Never! In retaining you it is 
not you whom I guard it is myself." 

These words indicated a resolution taken on the part 
of the commander, against which no arguments would 
prevail. 

" So, sir," I rejoined, " you give us simply the choice 
between life and death?" 

" Simply." 

" My friends," said I, " to a question thus put, there is 
nothing to answer. But no word of honor binds us to the 
master of this vessel." 

"None, sir," answered the Unknown. 

Then, in a gentler tone, he continued: 

"Now, permit me to finish what I have to say to you. 
I know you, M. Aronnax. You and your companions 
will not, perhaps, have so much to complain of in the 
chance which has bound you to my fate. You will find 
amongst the books which are my favorite study the work 
which you have published on 'the depths of the sea.' I 
have often read it. You have carried your work as far as 
terrestrial science permitted you. But you do not know 
all you have not seen all. Let me tell you then, Pro 
fessor, that you will not regret the time passed on board 
my vessel. You are going to visit the land of marvels." 

These words of the commander had a great effect upon 
me. I cannot deny it. My weak point was touched; and 
I forgot, for a moment, that the contemplation of these 
sublime subjects was not worth the loss of liberty. Be- 
sides, I trusted to the future to decide this grave question. 
So I contented myself with saying: 

" By what name ought I to address you?" 

" Sir," replied the commander, " I am nothing to you 
but Captain Nemo; and you and your companions are 
nothing to me but the passengers of the Nautilus." 

Captain Nemo called. A steward appeared. The cap- 
tain gave him his orders in that strange language which I 
did not understand. Then, turning toward the Canadian 
and Conseil: 

" A repast awaits you in your cabin," said he. " Be so 
good as to follow this man. 

"And now, M. Aronnax, our breakfast is ready. Per- 
mit me to lead the way." 



52 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

"I am at your service, Captain." 

I followed Captain Nemo; and as soon as I had passed 
through the door, I found myself in a kind of passage 
lighted by electricity, similar to the waist of a ship. After 
we had proceeded a dozen yards, a second door opened 
before me. 

I then entered a dining-room, decorated and furnished 
in severe taste. High oaken sideboards, inlaid with ebony, 
stood at the two extremities of the room, and upon their 
shelves glittered china, porcelain, and glass of inestimable 
value. The plate on the table sparkled in the rays which 
the luminous ceiling shed around, while the light was 
tempered and softened by exquisite paintings. 

In the center of the room was a table richly laid out. 
Captain Nemo indicated the place I was to occupy. 

The breakfast consisted of a certain number of dishes, 
the contents of which were furnished by the sea alone; 
and I was ignorant of the nature and mode of preparation 
of some of them. I acknowledged that they were good, 
but they had a peculiar flavor, which I easily became ac- 
customed to. These different aliments appeared to me to 
be rich in phosphorus, and I thought they must have a 
marine origin. 

Captain Nemo looked at me. I asked him no questions, 
but he guessed my thoughts, and answered of his own ac- 
cord the questions which I was burning to address to him. 

" The greater part of these dishes are unknown to you," 
he said to me. " However, you may partake of them 
without fear. They are wholesome and nourishing. For 
a long time I have renounced the food of the earth, and I 
am never ill now. My crew, who are healthy, are fed on 
the same food." 

" So," said I, "all these eatables are the produce of the 
sea?" 

" Yes, Professor, the sea supplies all my wants. Some- 
times I cast my nets in tow, and I draw them in ready to 
break. Sometimes I hunt in the midst of this element, 
which appears to be inaccessible to man, and quarry the 
game which dwells in my submarine forests. My flocks, 
like those of Neptune's old shepherds, graze fearlessly in 
the immense prairies of the ocean. I have a vast property 
there, which I cultivate myself, and which is always sown 
by the hand of the Creator of all things." 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 58 

"I can understand perfectly, sir, that your nets furnish 
excellent fish for your table; I can understand also that 
you hunt aquatic game in your submarine forests; but I 
cannot understand at all how a particle of meat, no mat- 
ter how small, can figure in your bill of fare." 

" This, which you believe to be meat, Professor, is 
nothing else than fillet of turtle. Here are also some dol- 
phins' livers, which you take to be ragout of pork. My 
cook is a clever fellow, who excels in dressing these various 
products of the ocean. Taste all these dishes. Here is a 
preserve of holothuria, which a Malay would declare to be 
unrivaled in the world; here is a cream, of which the milk 
has been furnished by the cetacea, and the sugar by the 
great fucus of the North Sea; and lastly, permit me to 
offer you some preserve of anemones, which is equal to 
that of the most delicious fruits." 

I tasted, more from curiosity than as a connoisseur, 
whilsi Captain Nemo enchanted me with his extraor- 
dinary stories. 

" You like the sea, Captain?" 

"Yes, I love it. The sea is everything. It covers 
seven-tenths of the terrestrial globe. Its breath is pure 
and healthy. It is an immense desert, where man is never 
lonely, for he feels life stirring on all sides. The sea is 
only the embodiment of a supernatural and wonderful 
existence. It is nothing but love and emotion; it is the 
' Living Infinite,' as one of your poets has said. In fact, 
Professor, Nature manifests herself in it by her three 
kingdoms, mineral, vegetable, and animal. The sea is 
the vast reservoir of Nature. The globe began with sea, 
so to speak; and who knows if it will not end with it? 
In it is supreme tranquillity. The sea does not belong to 
despots. Upon its surface men can still exercise unjust 
laws, fight, tear one another to pieces, and be carried away 
with terrestrial horrors. But at thirty feet below its 
level, their reign ceases, their influence is quenched, and 
their power disappears. Ah! sir, live live in the bosom 
of the waters! There only is independence. There I 
recognize no masters! There I am free!" 

Captain Nemo suddenly became silent in the midst of 
this enthusiasm, by which he was quite carried away. For 
a few moments he paced up and down, much agitated. 



54 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

Then he became more calm, regained his accustomed cold- 
ness of expression, and turning toward me: 

" Now, Professor," said he, " if you wish to go over the 
Nautilus, I am at your service." 

Captain Nemo rose. I followed him. A double door, 
contrived at the back of the dining-room, opened, and I 
entered a room equal in dimensions to that which I had 
just quitted. 

It was a library. High pieces of furniture, of black 
violet ebony inlaid with brass, supported upon their wide 
shelves a great number of books uniformly bound. They 
followed the shape of the room, terminating at the lower 
part in huge divans, covered with brown leather, which 
were curved, to afford the greatest comfort. Light mov- 
able desks, made to slide in and out at will, allowed one to 
rest one's book while reading. In the center stood an 
immense table, covered with pamphlets, amongst which 
were some newspapers, already of old date. The electric 
light flooded everything; it was shed from four unpolished 
globes half sunk in the volutes of the ceiling. I looked 
with real admiration at this room, so ingeniously fitted up, 
and I could scarcely believe my eyes. 

" Captain Nemo," said I to my host, who had just 
thrown himself on one of the divans, ".this is a library 
which would do honor to more than one o"f the continental 
palaces, and I am absolutely astounded when I consider 
that it can follow you to the bottom of the seas." 

" Where could one find greater solitude or silence, 
Professor?" replied Captain Nemo. " Did your study in 
the Musuem afford you such perfect quiet?" 
- " No, sir; and I must confess that it is a very poor one 
after yours. You must have six or seven thousand volumes 
here." 

"Twelve thousand, M. Aronnax. These are the only 
ties which bind me to the earth. But I had done with the 
world on the day when my Nautilus plunged for the first 
time beneath the waters. That day I bought my last 
volumes, my last pamphlets, my last papers, and front 
that time I wish to think that men no longer think or 
write. These books, Professor, are at your service besides, 
and you can make use of them freely." 

I thanked Captain Nemo, and went up to the shelves of 
the library. Works on science, morals and literature 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 55 

abounded in every language; but I did not see one single 
work on political economy; that subject appeared to be 
strictly proscribed. Strange to say, these books were irreg- 
ularly arranged, in whatever language they were written; 
and this medley proved that the captain of the Nautilus 
must have read indiscriminately the books which he took 
up by chance. 

" Sir," said I to the captain, " I thank you for having 
placed this library at my disposal. It contains treasures 
of science, and I shall profit by them." 

" This room is not only a library," said Captain Nemo, 
" it is also a smoking-room." 

"A smoking-room!" I cried. "Then one may smoke 
on board?" 

" Certainly." 

" Then, sir, I am forced to believe that you have kept 
up a communication with Havana." 

"Not any," answered the captain. "Accept this cigar, 
M. Aronnax; and though it does not come from Havana, 
you will be pleased with it, if you are a connoisseur." 

I took the cigar which was offered me; its shape re- 
called the London ones, but it seemed to be made of leaves 
of gold. I lighted it at a little brazier, which was sup- 
ported upon an elegant bronze stem, and drew the first 
whiffs with the delight of a lover of smoking who has not 
smoked for two days. 

"It is excellent," said I, "but it is not tobacco." 

"No!" answered the captain, "this tobacco comes 
neither from Havana nor from the East. It is a kind of 
sea-weed, rich in nicotine, with .which the sea ^provides 
me, but somewhat sparingly." 

At that moment Captain Nemo opened a door which 
stood opposite to that by which I had entered the library, 
and I passed into an immense drawing-room, splendidly 
lighted. 

It was a vast four- sided room, thirty feet long, eighteen 
wide, and fifteen high. A luminous ceiling, decorated 
with light arabesques, shed a soft clear light over all the 
marvels accumulated in this museum. For it was in fact 
a museum, in which an intelligent and prodigal hand had 
gathered all the treasures of nature and art, with artistic 
confusion which distinguishes a painter's studio. Thirty 
first-rate pictures, uniformly framed, separated by bright 



56 30,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

drapery, ornamented the walls, which were hung with 
tapestry of severe design. I saw works of great value, the 
greater part of which I had admired in the special collec- 
tions of Europe, and in the exhibitions of paintings. The 
several schools of the old masters were represented by a 
Madonna of Raphael, a Virgin of Leonardo da Vinci, a 
nymph of Oorreggio, a woman of Titian, an Adoration of 
Veronese, an Assumption of Murillo, a portrait of Hol- 
bein, a monk of Velasquez, a martyr of Ribeira, a fair of 
Rubens, two Flemish landscapes of Teniers, three little 
"genre" pictures of Gerard Dow, Metsu and Paul Potter, 
two specimens of Gericault and Prudhon, and some sea- 
pieces of Backhuyser and Veruet. Amongst the works 
of modern painters were pictures with the signatures of 
Delacroix, Ingress, Decamp, Troyon, Meissonnier, Dau- 
bigny, etc.; and some admirable statues in marble and 
bronze, after the finest antique models, stood upon pedes- 
tals in the corners of this magnificent museum. Amaze- 
ment, as the captain of the Nautilus had predicted, had 
already begun to take possession of me. 

"Professor," said this strange man, "you must excuse 
the unceremonious way in which I receive you, and the 
disorder of this room." 

" Sir," I answered, " without seeking to know who you 
are, I recognize in you an artist." 

"An amateur, nothing more, sir. Formerly I loved to 
collect these beautiful works created by the hand of man. 
I sought them greedily and ferreted them, out indefati- 
gably, and I have been able to bring together some objects 
of great value. These are my last souvenirs of that world 
which is dead to me. In my eyes, your modern artists 
are already old; they have two or three thousand years of 
existence; I confound them in my own mind. Masters 
have no age." 

"And these musicians?" said I, pointing out some 
works of Weber, Rossini, Mozart, Beethoven, Haydn, 
Meyerbeer, Herold, Wagner, Auber, Gounod, and a num- 
ber of others scattered over a large model piano organ 
which occupied one of the panels of the drawing-room. 

" These musicians," replied Captain Nemo, "are the con- 
temporaries of Orpheus, for in the memory of the dead all 
chronological differences are effaced: and lam dead, Pro- 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 57 

fessor; as much dead as those of your friends who are sleep- 
ing six feet under the earth!" 

Captain Nemo was silent, and seemed lost in profound 
revery. I contemplated him with deep interest, analyzing 
in silence the strange expression of his countenance. Lean- 
ing on his elbow against an angle of a costly mosaic table, 
he no longer saw me he had forgotten my presence, 

I did not disturb this revery, and continued my ob- 
servation of the curiosities which enriched this drawing- 
room. 

Under elegant glass cases, fixed by copper rivets, were 
classed and labeled the most precious productions of the 
sea which had ever been presented to the eye of a natu- 
ralist. My delight as a professor may be conceived. 

The division containing the zoophytes presented the 
most curious specimens of the two groups of polypi and 
ecliinoderms. In the first group, the tubipores, were 
gorgonias arranged like a fan, soft sponges of Syria, ises of 
the Moluccas, pennatules, an admirable virgularia of the 
Norwegian seas, variegated umbellulairse, alcyonariae, a 
whole series of madrepores, which my master Milne- Ed- 
wards has so cleverly classified, amongst which I remarked 
some wonderful flabellinse, oculinae of the island of Bour- 
bon, the " Neptune's car" of the Antilles, superb varieties 
of corals, in short, every species of those curious polypi of 
which entire islands are formed, which will one day be- 
come continents. Of the ecliinoderms, remarkable for 
their coating of spines, asteri, sea-stars, pantacrinae, coma- 
tules, asterophons, echini, holothuri, etc., represented in- 
dividually a complete collection of this group. 

A somewhat nervous conchologist would certainly 
have fainted before other more numerous cases, in which 
were classified the specimens of molluscs. It was a col- 
lection of inestimable value, which time fails me to de- 
scribe minutely. Amongst these specimens, I will quote 
from memory only the elegant royal hammer-fish of the 
Indian Ocean, whose regular white spots stood out brightly 
on a red and brown ground, an imperial spondyle, bright 
colored, bristling with spines, a rare specimen in the Euro- 
pean museums (I estimated its value at not less than 
1,000); a common hammer-fish of the sea's of New Hol- 
land, which is only procured with difficulty; exotic buc- 
cardia of Senegal; fragile white bivalve shells, which n 



58 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

breath might shatter like a soap-bubble; several varieties 
of the aspirgillum of Java, a kind of calcareous tube, edged 
with leafy folds, and much debated by amateurs; a whole 
series of trochi, some a greenish yellow, found in the Amer- 
ican seas, others a reddish-brown, natives of Australian 
waters; others from the Gulf of Mexico, remarkable for 
their imbricated shell; stellari found in th&gt; Southern Seas; 
and last, the rarest of all, the magnificent spur of New 
Zealand; and every description of delicate and fragile shells 
to which science has given appropriate names. 

Apart, in separate compartments, were spread out chap- 
lets of pearls of the greatest beauty, which reflected the 
electric light in little sparks of fire; pink pearls, torn 
from the pinna-marina of the Red Sea; green pearls of 
the haliotyde iris; yellow, blue, and black pearls, the 
curious productions of the divers molluscs of every ocean, 
and certain mussels of the water-courses of the North; 
lastly, several specimens of inestimable value which had 
been gathered from the rarest pintadmes. Some of these 
pearls were larger than a pigeon's egg, and were worth as 
much and more than that which the traveler Tavernier 
sold to the Shah of Persia for three millions, and sur- 
passed the one in the possession of the Imam of Muscat, 
which I had believed to be unrivaled in the world. 

Therefore, to estimate the value of this collection was 
simply impossible. Captain Nemo must have expended 
millions in the acquirement of these various specimens, 
and I was thinking what source he could hav edrawn from, 
to have been able thus to gratify his fancy for collecting, 
when I was interrupted by these words: 

"You are examining my shells, Professor? Unques- 
tionably they must be interesting to a naturalist; but for 
me they have a far greater charm, for I have collected 
them all with my own hands, and there is not a sea on the 
face of the globe which has escaped my researches." 

" I can understand, Captain, the delight of wandering 
about in the midst of such riches. You are one of those 
who have collected their treasures themselves. No museum 
in Europe possesses such a collection of the produce of the 
ocean. But if I exhaust all my admiration upon it, I 
shall have none left~for the vessel which carries it. I* do 
not wish to pry into your secrets; but I must confess that 
this Nautilus, with the motive power which is confined in 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 59 

it, the contrivances which enable it to be worked, the 
powerful agent which propels it, all excite my curiosity 
to the highest pitch. I see suspended on the walls of this 
room-instruments of whose use I am ignorant." 

"You will find these same instruments in my own 
room. Professor, where I shall have much pleasure in ex- 
plaining their use to you. But first come and inspect the 
cabin which is set apart for your own use. You must see 
how you will be accommodated on board the Nautilus." 

I followed Captain Nemo, who, by one of the doors 
opening from each panel of the drawing-roorn. regained 
the waist. He conducted me toward the bow, and there 
I found, not a cabin, but an elegant room, with a bed, 
dressing-table, and several other pieces of furniture. 

I could only thank my host. 

"Your room adjoins mine," said he, opening a door, 
" and mine opens into the drawing-room that we have 
just quitted." 

I entered the captain's room; it had a severe, almost a 
monkish, aspect. A small iron bedstead, a table, some 
articles for the toilet; the whole lighted by a skylight. No 
comforts, the strictest necessaries only. 

Captain Nemo pointed to a seat. 

"Be so good as to sit down," he said. I seated myself, 
and he began thus: 



