CHAPTER XVIII. 

THE POULPS. 

FOE several days the Nautilus kept off from the Ameri- 
can coast. Evidently it did not wish to risk the tides of 
the Gulf of Mexico, or of the sea of the Antilles. April 
16th we sighted Martinique and Guadeloupe from a dis- 
tance of about thirty miles. I saw their tall peaks for an 
instant. The Canadian, who counted on carrying out his 
projects in the Gulf, by either landing, or hailing one of 
the numerous boats that coast from one island to another, 
was quite disheartened. Flight would have been quite 
practicable if Ned Land had been able to take possession 
of the boat without the captain's knowledge. But in the 
open sea it could not be thought of. The Canadian, Con- 
seil and I had a long conversation on this subject. For 
six months we had been prisoners on board the Nautilus. 
We had traveled 17,000 leagues, and, as Ned Land said, 
there was no reason why it should not come to an end. 
We could hope nothing from the captain of the Nautilus, 
but only from ourselves. Besides, for some time past he 
had become graver, more retired, less sociable. He seemed 
to shun me. I met him rarely. Formerly, he was pleased 
to explain the submarine marvels to me, now, he left me 
to my studies, and came no more to the saloon. What 
change had come over him? For what cause? For my 
part, I did not wish to bury with me my curious and no-vel 
studies. I had now the power to write the true book of 
the sea; and this book, sooner or later, I wished to see 
daylight. Then again, in the water by the Antilles, ten 
yards below the surface of the waters, by the open panels, 
what interesting products I had to enter on my daily 
notes! There were, among other zoophytes, those known 
under the name of physalis pelagica, a sort of large ob- 
long bladder with mother-of-pearl rays, holding out their 
membrances to the wind, and letting their blue tenta- 
cles float like threads of silk: charming medusae to the 



2GO 20,000 LEAGUES rXDEIl THE SEAS. 

eye, real nettles to the touch, that distill a corrosive fluid. 
There were also anuelides, a yard and a half long, fur- 
nished with a pink horn, and with 1,700 locomotive 
organs, that wind through the waters, and throw out 
in passing all the light of the solar spectrum. There 
were, in the fish category, some Malabar rays, enormous 
grisly things, ten feet long, weighing 600 pounds, the 
pectoral fin triangular in the midst of a slightly humped 
back, the eyes fixed in the extremities of the face, beyond 
the head, and which floated like .weft, and looked some- 
times like an opaque shutter on our glass window. There 
were American balistte, which nature has only dressed in 
black and white; gobies, with yellow fins and prominent 
jaws; mackerel sixteen feet long, with short pointed teeth, 
covered with { small scales, belonging to the albicore species. 
Then, in swarms, appeared gray mullet, covered with 
stripes of gold from the head to the tail, beating their 
resplendent fins, like masterpieces of jewelry, consecrated 
formerly 'to Diana, particularly sought after by rich 
Komans, and of which the proverb says, '' Whoever takes 
them does not eat them." Lastly, pomacanthe dorees, 
ornamented with emerald bands, dressed in velvet and 
silk, passed before our eyes like Veronese lords ; spurred 
spari passed with their pectoral fins; clupanodons. fifteen 
inches long, enveloped iu their phosphorescent light; 
mullet beat the sea with their large jagged tail; red ven- 
daces seemed to mow the waves with their showy pectoral 
fins; and silvery selenes, worthy of their name, rose on 
the horizon of the waters like so many moons with whitish 
rays. April 20th we had risen to a mean height of 1,500 
yards. The land nearest us then was the archipelago of 
the Bahamas. There rose high submarine cliffs covered 
with large weeds, giant laminariae and fuci, a perfect 
espalier of hydrophytes worthy of a Titan world. It was 
about eleven o'clock when Ned Land drew my attention 
to a formidable pricking, like the sting of an ant, which 
was produced by means of large seaweeds. 

" Well," I said, " these are proper caverns for poulps. 
and I should not be astonished to see some of these 
monsters." 

"What!" said Conseil; "cuttle-fish, real cuttle-ffsh, 
of the cephalopod class." 

"No," 1 said; "poulps of huge dimensions." 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 261 

" I will never believe that such animals exist," said 
Ned. 

" Well," said Conseil, with the most serious air in the 
world, " I remember perfectly to have seen a large vessel 
drawn under the waves by a cephalopod's arm." 

" You saw that?" said the Canadian. 

" Fes, Ned." 

" With your own eyes?" 

" With my own eyes." 

"Where, pray, might that be?" 

" At St. Malo," answered Conseil. 

"In the port?" said Ned, ironically. 

" No; in a church," replied Conseil. 

"In a church!" cried the Canadian. 

" Yes; friend Ned. In a picture representing the poulp 
in question." 

" Good!" said Ned Land, bursting out laughing. 

" He is quite right," I said. " I have heard of this 
picture; but the subject represented is taken from a 
legend, a:id you know what to think of legends in the 
matter of natural history. Besides, when it is a question 
of monsters, the imagination is apt to run wild. Not only 
is it supposed that these poulps can draw down vessels, but 
a certain Glaus Magnus speaks of a cephalopod a mile long, 
that is more like an island, than an animal. It is also said 
that the Bishop of Nidros was building an altar on an im- 
mense rock. Mass finished, the rock began to walk, and 
returned to the sea. The rock was a poulp. Another 
bishop, Pontoppidan, speaks also of a poulp on which a 
regiment of cavalry could maneuver. Lastly, the ancient 
naturalists speak of monsters whose mouths where like 
gulfs, and which were too large to pass through the Straits 
of Gibraltar." 

" But how much is true of these stories?" asked Conseil. 

"Nothing, my friends; at least of that which passes the 
limit of truth to get to fable or legend. Nevertheless, 
there must be some ground for the imagination of the 
story-tellers. One cannot deny that poulps and cuttle-fish 
exist of a large species, inferior, however, to the cetaceans. 
Aristotle has stated the dimensions of a cuttle-fish as five 
cubits, or nine feet two inches. Our fishermen frequently 
see some that are more than four feet long. Some skeletons 



2G^ 20.000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

of poulps are preserved in the museums of Trieste and 
Montpelier, that measure two yards in length. Besides, 
according to the calculations of some naturalists, one of 
these animals, only six feet long, would have tentacles 
twenty-seven feet long. That would suffice to make a 
formidable monster." 

" Do they fish for them in these days?" asked Ned. 

" If they do not fish for them, sailors see them, at least. 
One of my friends, Captain Paul Bos, of Havre, lias often 
affirmed that he met one of these monsters, of colossal 
dimensions, in the Indian seas. But the most astonishing 
fact, and which does not permit of the denial of the exist- 
ence of these gigantic animals, happened some years ago, 
in 1861." 

" What is the fact?" asked Ned Land. 

"This is it. In 1861, to the northeast of Teneriffe, 
very nearly in the same latitude we are in now, the crew of 
the dispatch-boat Alector perceived a monstrous cuttle-fish 
swimming in the waters. Captain Bouguer went near to 
the animal; and attacked it with harpoons and guns, with- 
out much success, for balls and harpoons glided over the 
soft flesh. After several fruitless attempts, the crew tried 
to pass a slip-knot round the body of the mollusc. The 
noose slipped as far as the caudal fins, and there stopped. 
They tried then to haul it on board, but its weight was so 
considerable that the tightness of the cord separated the 
tail from the body, and, deprived of this ornament, he 
disappeared under the water." 

"Indeed! Is that a fact?" 

" An indisputable fact, my good Ned. They proposed 
to name this poulp ' Bouguer's cuttle-fish.' &gt;: 

"What length was it?" asked the Canadian. 

"Did it not measure about six yards?" said Conseil, 
who, posted at the window, was examining again the 
irregular windings of the cliff. 

" Precisely," I replied. 

"Its head," rejoined Conseil, "was it not crowned with 
eight tentacles, that beat the water like a nest of serpents?" 

" Precisely." 

" Had not its eyes, placed at the back of its head, con 
giderable development?" 

"Yes, Conseil," 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 263 

" And was not its mouth like a parrot's beak?" 

"Exactly, Conseil?" 

"Very well! no offense to master," he replied, quietly; 
" if this is not Bouguer's cuttle-fish, it is, at least, one of 
its brothers." 

I looked at Conseil. Ned Land hurried to the window. 

" What a horrible beast!" he cried. 

I looked in my turn, and could not repress a gesture of 
disgust. Before my eyes was a horrible monster, worthy 
to figure in the legends of the marvelous. It was an im- 
mense cuttle-fish, being eight yards long. It swam cross- 
ways in the direction of the Nautilus with great speed, 
watching us with its enormous staring green eyes. Its 
eight arms, or rather feet, fixed to its head, that have 
given the name of cephalopod to these animals were twice 
as long as its body, and were twisted like the Furies' hair. 
One could see 250 air-holes on the inner side of the ten- 
tacles. The monster's mouth, a horned beak like a par- 
rot's opened and shut vertically. Its tongue a horned 
substance, furnished with several rows of pointed teeth, 
came out quivering from this veritable pair of shears. 
What a freak of nature, a bird's beak on a mollusc! Its 
spindle-like body formed a flesh mass that might weigh 
4,000 or 5,000 Ibs. ; the varying color changing with great 
rapidity, according to the irritation of the animal, passed 
successively from livid gray to a reddish brown. What 
irritated this mollusc? No doubt the presence of the 
Nautilus, more formidable than itself, and on which its 
suckers or its jaws had no hold. Yet, what monsters these 
poulps are! what vitality the Creator has given them! 
what vigor in their movements! and they possess three 
hearts! Chance had brought us in presence of this cuttle- 
fish, and I did not wish to lose the opportunity of care- 
fully studying this specimen of cephalopods. I overcame 
the horror that inspired me; and, taking a pencil, began 
to draw it. 

"Perhaps this is the same which the Alector saw," 
said Conseil. 

"No," replied the Canadian; "for this is whole, and 
the other had lost its tail." 

"That is no reason," I replied. "The arms and tails 
of these animals axe reformed by redintegration; and, in 



204 20,000 LEAGUES UKDER THE SEAS. 

seven years, the tail of Bonguer's cuttle-fish has no doubt 
had time to grow." 

By this time other poulps appeared at the port light. 
I counted seven. They formed a procession after the Nau- 
tilus, and'I heard their beaks gnashing against the iron 
hull. I continued my work. These monsters kept in the 
water with such precision, that they seemed immovable. 
Suddenly the Nautilus stopped. A shock made it tremble 
in every plate. 

" Have we struck anything?" I asked. 

"In any case," replied the Canadian, "we shall be free, 
for we are floating." 

The Nautilus was floating, no doubt, but it did not 
move. A minute passed. Captain Nemo, followed by his 
lieutenant, entered the drawing-room. I had not seen 
him for some time. He seemed dull. Without noticing 
or speaking to us, he went to the panel, looked at the 
poulps, and said something to his lieutenant. The latter 
went out. Soon the panels were shut. The ceiling was 
lighted. I went toward the captain. 

"A curious collection of poulps?" I said. 

"Yes, indeed, Mr. Naturalist," he replied; "and we 
are going to fight them, man to beast." 

I looked at him. I thought I had not heard aright. 

"Man to beast?" I repeated. 

"Yes, sir. The screw is stopped. I think that the 
horny jaw of one of the cuttle-fish is entangled in the 
blades. That is what prevents our moving." 

" What are you going to do?" 

"Kise to the surface, and slaughter this vermin." 

"A difficult enterprise." 

"Yes, indeed. The electric bullets are powerless 
against the soft flesh, where they do not find resistance 
enough to go off. But we shall attack them with the 
hatchet." 

"And the harpoon, sir/' said the Canadian, " if you do 
not refuse my help." 

" I will accept it, Master Land." 

" We will follow you," I said; and following Captain 
Nemo, we went toward the central staircase. 

There, about ten men with boarding hatchets wera 
roady for the attack. Conseil and I took two hatchets; 



30,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 2G5 

Ne.l Land seized a harpoon. The Nautilus had then risen 
to the surface. One of the sailors, posted on the top lad- 
der-step, unscrewed the bolts of the panels. But hardly 
were the screws loosed, when the panel rose with great 
violence, evidently drawn by the suckers of a poulp's arm. 
Immediately one of these arms slid like a serpent down 
the opening, and twenty others were above. With one 
blow of the ax, Captain Nemo cut this formidable tentacle 
that slid wriggling down the ladder. Just as we were 
pressing one on the other to reach the platform, two other 
arms, lashing the air, came down on the seaman placed 
before Captain Nemo, and lifted him up with irresistible 
power. Captain Nemo uttered a cry, and rushed out. We 
hurried after him. 

- What a scene! The unhappy man, seized by the tent- 
acle, and fixed to the suckers, was balanced in the air at 
the caprice of this enormous trunk. He rattled in his 
throat, he cried, "Help! help!" These words, spoken in 
French, startled me! I had a fellow-countryman on board, 
perhaps several! That heart rending cry! I shall hear it 
all my life. The unfortunate man was lost. Who could 
rescue him from that powerful pressure? However, Cap- 
tain Nemo, had rushed to the poulp, an.d with one blow 
of the ax had cut through one arm. His lieutenant 
struggled furiously against other monsters that crept on 
the flanks of the Nautilus. The crew fought with their 
axes. The Canadian, Conseil, and I buried our weapons 
in the fleshy masses; a strong smell of musk penetrated 
the atmosphere. It was horrible! 

For one instant I thought the unhappy man entangled 
with the poulp would be torn from its powerful suction. 
Seven of the eight arms had been cutoff. One only wrig- 
gled in the air, brandishing the victim like a feather. But 
just as Captain Nemo and his lieutenant threw themselves 
on it, the animal ejected a stream of black liquid. We 
were blinded with it. When the cloud dispersed, the 
cuttle-fish had disappeared, and my unfortunate country- 
man with it. Ten or twelve poulps now invaded the 
platform and sides of the Nautilus. We rolled pell-mell 
into the midst of this nest of serpents, that wriggled on 
the platform in the waves of blood and ink. It seemed as 
though these slimy tentacles sprang up like the hydra's 
heads. Ned Land's harpoon, at each stroke, was plunged 



2GG 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

into the staring eyes of the cuttle-fish. But my bold 
companion was suddenly overturned by the tentacles of 
a monster he had not been able to avoid. 

Ah! how my heart beat with emotion and horror! The 
formidable beak of a cuttle-fish was open over Ned Land. 
The unhappy man would be cut in two. I rushed to his 
succor. But Captain Nemo was before me; his ax dis- 
appeared between the two enormous jaws, and, miracu- 
lously saved, the Canadian, rising, plunged his harpoon 
deep into the triple heart of the poulp. 

"I owed myself this revenge!" said the captain to the 
Canadian. 

Ned bowed without replying. The combat had lasted 
a quarter of an hour. The monsters, vanquished and 
mutilated, left us at last, and disappeared under the 
waves. Captain Nemo, covered with blood, nearly ex- 
hausted, gazed upon the sea that had swallowed up one 
of his companions, and great tears gathered in his eyes. 



