CHAPTER XXIII. 

THE CORAL KINGDOM. 

THE next day I woke with my head singularly clear 
To my great surprise I was in my own room. My com- 
panions, no doubt, had been reinstated in their cabin 
without having perceived it any more than I. Of what 



T32 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

had passed during the night they were as ignorant as I 
was, and to penetrate this mystery I only reckoned upon 
the chances of the future. 

I then thought of quitting my room. Was I free again, 
or a prisoner? Quite free. I opened the door, went to 
the half-deck, went up the central stairs. The panels, 
shut the evening before, were open. I went on to the plat- 
form. 

Ned Land and Conseil waited there for me. I ques- 
tioned them; they knew nothing. Lost in a heavy sleep, 
in which they had been totally unconscious, they had been 
astonished at finding themselves in their cabin. 

As for the Nautilus, it seemed quiet and mysterious as 
ever. It floated on the surface of the waves at a moderate 
pace. Nothing seemed changed on board. 

The second lieutenant then came on to the platform, 
and gave the usual order below. 

As for Captain Nemo, he did not appear. 

Of the people on board I only saw the impassive stew- 
ard, who served me with his usual dumb regularity. 

About two o'clock, I was in the drawing-room, busied 
in arranging my notes, when the captain opened the door 
and appeared. I bowed. He made a slight inclination 
in return, without speaking. I resumed my work, hoping 
that he would perhaps give me some explanation of the 
events of the preceding night. He made none. I looked 
at him. He seemed fatigued; his heavy eyes had not been 
refreshed by sleep; his face looked very sorrowful. He 
walked to and fro, sat down and got up again, took up a 
chance book, put it down, consulted his instruments with- 
out taking his habitual notes, and seemed restless and 
uneasy. At last he came up to me, and said: 

"Are you a doctor, M. Aronriax?" 

I so little expected such a question, that I stared some 
time at him without answering. 

"Are you a doctor," he repeated. "Several of your 
colleagues have studied medicine." 

"Well," said I, "I am a doctor and resident surgeon to 
the hospital. I practiced several years before entering the 
museum." 

"Very well, sir." 

My answer had evidently satisfied the captain. But 
not knowing what he would say next, I waited for other 



20,000 LEAGUES UJSTDEK THE SEAS. 133 

questions, reserving my answers according to circum- 
stances. 

" M. Aronnax, will you consent to prescribe for one of 
my men?" he asked. 

" Is he ill?" 

"Yes." 

"I am ready to follow you." 

"Come then." 

I own my heart beat, I do not know why. I saw a 
certain connection between the illness of one of the crew 
and the events of the day before: and this mystery inter- 
ested me at least as much as the sick man. 

Captain Nemo conducted me to the poop of the Nauti- 
lus, and took me into a cabin situated near the sailor's 
quarters. 

There, on a bed, lay a man about forty years of age, 
with a resolute expression of countenance, a true type of 
an Anglo-Saxon. 

I leant over him. He was not only ill, he was wounded. 
His head swathed in bandages covered with blood, lay on 
a pillow. I undid the bandages, and the wounded man 
looked at me with his large eyes and gave no sign of pain 
as I did it. It was a horrible wound. The skull, shat- 
tered by some deadly weapon, left the brain exposed, which 
was much injured. Clots of blood had formed in the 
bruised and broken mass, in color like the dregs of wine. 

There was both contusion and suffusion of the brain. 
His breathing was slow, and some spasmodic movements 
of the muscles agitated his face. I felt his pulse. It was 
intermittent. The extremities of the body were growing 
cold already, and I saw death must inevitably ensue. After 
dressing the unfortunate man's wounds, I readjusted the 
bandages on his head, and turned to Captain Nemo. 

"What caused this wound?" I asked. 

"What does it signify?" he replied, evasively. "A 
shock has broken one of the levers of the engine, which 
struck myself. But your opinion as to his state?" 

I hesitated before giving it. 

" You may speak," said the captain. " This man does 
not understand French." 

I gave a last look at the wounded man. " He will be 
dead in two hours." 

"Can nothing save him?" 



134 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

" Nothing." 

Captain Nemo's hand contracted, and some tears glis- 
tened in his eyes, which I thought incapable of shedding 
any. 

For some moments I still watched the dying man, whose 
life ebbed slowly. His pallor increased under the electric 
light that was shed over his death-bed. I looked at his 
intelligent forehead, furred with premature wrinkles, 
produped probably by misfortune and sorrow. I tried to 
learn the secret of his life from the last words that escaped 
his lips. 

" You can go now, M. Aronnax," said the captain. 

I left him in the dying man's cabin, and returned to my 
room, much affected by this scene. During the whole 
day, I was haunted by uncomfortable suspicions, and at 
night I slept badly, and, between my broken dreams, I 
fancied I heard distant sighs like the notes of a funeral 
psalm. Were they the prayers of the dead, murmured in 
that language that I could not understand? 

The next morning I went on to the bridge. Captain 
Nemo was there before me. As soon as he perceived me 
he came to me. 

" Professor, will it be convenient to you to make a sub- 
marine excursion to-day?" 

" With my companions?" 

"If they like." 
" We obey your orders, captain." 

" Will you be so good then as to put on your cork- 
jackets?" 

It was not a question of dead or dying. I rejoined Ned 
Land and Conseil, and told them of Captain Nemo's prop- 
osition. Conseil hastened to accept, and this time the 
Canadian seemed quite willing to follow our example. 

It was eight o'clock in the morning. At half-past eight 
we were equipped for this new excursion, and provided 
with two contrivances for light and breathing. The double 
door was open; and accompanied by Captain Nemo, who 
was followed by a dozen of the crew, we set foot, at a 
depth of about thirty feet, on the solid bottom on which 
the Nautilus rested. 

A slight declivity ended in an uneven bottom, at fifteen 
fathoms depth. This bottom differed entirely from the 
one I had visited on my first excursion under the waters 



30,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 135 

of the Pacific Ocean. Here, there was no fine sand, no 
submarine prairies, no sea-forest. I immediately recog- 
nized that marvelous region in which, on that day, the 
Captain did the honors to us. It was the coral kingdom. 
In the zoophyte branch and in the alcyon class I noticed 
the gorgoniae, the isidese, and the corollaries. 

The light produced a thousand charming varieties play- 
in the midst of the branches that were so vividly colored. 
I seemed to see the membraneous and cylindrical tubes 
tremble beneath the undulation of the waters. I was 
tempted to gather their fresh petals, ornamented with 
delicate tentacles, some just blown, the others budding, 
while small fish, swimming swiftly, touched them slightly, 
like flights of birds. But if my hand approached these 
living flowers, these animated sensitive plants, the whole 
colony took alarm. The white petals re-entered their red 
cases, the flowers faded as I looked, and the bush changed 
into a block of stony knobs. 

Chance had thrown me just by the most precious 
specimens of this zoophyte. This coral was more valuable 
than that found in the Mediterranean, on the coasts of 
France, Italv, and Barbary. Its tints justified the poetical 
names of "Flower of Blood," and "Froth of Blood," that 
trade has given to its most beautiful productions. Coral 
is sold for 20 per ounce; and in this place, the watery 
beds would make the fortunes of a company of coral-divers. 
This precious matter, often confused with other polypi, 
formed then the inextricable plots called " macciota," 
and on which I noticed several beautiful specimens of 
pink coral. 

But soon the bushes contract, and the arborizations in- 
crease. Real petrified thickets, long joists of fantastic 
architecture, were disclosed before us. Captain Nemo 
placed himself under a dark gallery, where by a slight 
declivity we reached a depth of 100 yards. The light from 
our lamps produced sometimes magical effects, following 
the rough outlines of the natural arches, and pendants dis- 
posed like lusters, that were tipped with points of fire. 
Between the coralline shrubs I noticed other polypi not 
less curious melites, and irises with articulated ramifica- 
tions; also some tufts of coral, some green, others red, like 
sea- weed incrusted in their calcareous salts, that natural- 
ists, after long discussion, have definitely classed in the 



136 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER' THE SEAS 

vegetable kingdom. But following the remark of a think, 
ing man, " there is perhaps the real point where life rises 
obscurely from the sleep of a stone, without detaching 
itself from the rough point of departure." 

At last, after walking two hours, we had attained a 
depth of about 300 yards, that is to say, the extreme limit 
on which coral begins to form. But there was no isolated 
bush, nor modest brushwood, at the bottom of lofty trees. 
It was an immense forest of large mineral vegetations, 
enormous petrified trees, united by garlands of elegant plu- 
rnarias, sea bindweed, all adorned with clouds and reflec- 
tions. We passed freely under their high branches, lost 
in the shade of the waves, while at our feet, tubipores, 
meandrines, stars, fungi, and caryophyllidae formed a 
carpet of flowers sown with dazzling gems. TV hat an in- 
describable spectacle! 

Captain Nemo had stopped. I and my companions 
halted, and turning round, I saw his men were forming a 
semicircle round their chief. Watching attentively, I 
observed that four of them carried on their shoulders an 
object of an oblong shape. 

We occupied, in this place, the center of a vast glade 
surrounded by the lofty foliage of the submarine forest. 
Our lamps threw over this place a sort of clear twilight 
that singularly elongated the shadows on the ground. At 
the end of the glade the darkness increased, and was only 
relieved by little sparks reflected by the points of coral. 

Ned Land and Conseil were near me. We watched, and 
I thought I was going to witness a strange scene. On 
observing the ground, I saw that it was raised in certain 
places by slight excrescences incrusted with limy deposits, 
and disposed with a regularity that betrayed the hand of 
man. 

In the midst of the glade, on a pedestal of rocks 
roughly piled up, stood a cross of coral, that extended its 
long arms that one might have thought were made of 
petrified blood. 

Upon a sign from Captain Nemo, one of the men ad- 
vanced; and at some feet from the cross, he began to dig 
a hole with a pickax that he took from his belt. I under- 
stood all! This glade was a cemetery, this hoi? tomb, 
this oblong object the body of the man who had diea ~, 
the night! The Captain and his men had come to buir, 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. IS/ 

their companion in this general resting-place, at the 
6ottom of this inaccessible ocean. 

The grave was being dug slowly; the fish fled on all 
sides while their retreat was thus being disturbed; I heard 
the strokes of the pickax, which sparkled when it hit 
upon some flint lost at the bottom of the waters. The 
hole was soon large and deep enough to receive the body. 
Then the bearers approached; the body, enveloped in a 
tissue of white byssus, was lowered, into the damp grave. 
Captain Nemo, with his arms crossed on his breast, and all 
the friends of him who had loved them, knelt in prayer. 

The grave was then filled in with the rubbish taken from 
the ground, which formed a slight mound. When this 
was done, Captain Nemo and his men rose; then, ap- 
proaching the grave, they knelt again, and all extended 
their hands ill sign of a last adieu. Then the funeral 
procession returned to the Nautilus, passing under the 
arches of the forest, in the midst of thickets, along the 
coral bushes, and still on the ascent. At last the fires on 
board appeared, and their luminous track guided us to the 
Nautilus. At one o'clock we had returned. 

As soon as I had changed my clothes, I went up on to 
the platform, and, a prey to conflicting emotions, I sat 
down near the binnacle. Captain Nemo joined me. I 
rose and said to him: 

" So, as I said he would, this man died in the night?" 

" Yes, M. Aronnax." 

"And he rests now, near his companions, in the coral 
cemetery?" 

" Yes, forgotten by all else, but not by us. We dug 
the grave, and the polypi undertake to seal our dead for 
all eternity." And burying bis face quickly in his hands, 
he tried in vain to suppress a sob. Then he added " Our 
peaceful cemetery is there, some hundred feet below the 
surface of the waves. " 

" Your dead sleep quietly, at least, Captain, out of the 
reach of sharks." 

" Yes, sir, of sharks and m&amp;n" gravely replied the 
Captain. 



138 20,000 LEAGUES UNDEK THE SEAS. 



PART II. 



