CHAPTER I. 

THE INDIAN OCEAN. 

WE now come to the second part of our journey under 
the sea. The first ended with the moving scene in the 
coral cemetery, which left such a deep impression on my 
mind. Thus, in the midst of this great sea, Captain 
Nemo's life was passing even to his grave, which he had 
prepared in one of its deepest abysses. There not one of 
the ocean's monsters could trouble the last sleep of the 
crew of the Nautilus, of those friends riveted to each other 
in death as in life. " Nor any man either," had added 
the Captain. Still the same fierce, implacable defiance 
toward human society. 

I could no longer content myself with the hypothesis 
that satisfied Couseil. 

That worthy fellow persisted in seeing in the commander 
of the Nautilus one of those unknown savants who return 
mankind contempt for indifference. For him, he was a 
misunderstood genius, who, tired of earth's deceptions, 
had taken refuge in this inaccessible medium, where he 
might follow his instincts freely. To my mind, this 
hypothesis explained but one side of Captain Nemo's 
character. 

Indeed, the mystery of that last night, during which we 
had been chained in prison, the sleep, and the precaution 
so riolently taken by the captain of snatching from my 
eyes the glass I had raised to sweep the horizon, the mortal 
wound of the man, due to an unaccountable stock of the 
Nautilus, all put me on a new track. No; Captain Nemo 
was not satisfied with shunning man. His formidable ap- 
paratus not only suited his instinct of freedom, but, per- 
haps, the design of some terrible retaliation. 

At this moment nothing is clear to me; I catch but a 
glimpse of light amidst all the darkness, and I must con- 
fine myself to writing as events shall dictate, 



U. JOO LEAGUES I 'M-li: 1 II i. IdV 

'o f os 

Tliat day. the 24th of January, 1868, at noon,, the second 
officer came to take altitude of the sun. I mounted the 
platform, lit a cigar, and watched the operation. It 
seemed to me that the man did not understand French; 
for several times I made remarks in a loud voice, which 
must have drawn from him some involuntary sign of atten- 
tion if he had understood them; but he remained undis- 
turbed and dumb. 

As he was taking observations with the sextant, one of 
the sailors of the Nautilus (the strong man who had accom- 
panied us on our first submarine excursion to the Island of 
(Jrespo) came to clean the glasses of the lantern. I ex- 
amined the fittings of the apparatus, the strength of which 
was increased a hundred-fold by lenticular rings, placed 
similar to those in a light-house, and which projected their 
brilliance in a horizontal plane. The electric lamp was 
combined in such a way as to give its most powerful light. 
Indeed it was produced in vacua, which insured both its 
steadiness and its intensity. This vacuum economized the 
graphite points, between which the luminous arc was de- 
veloped an important point of economy for Captain 
Nemo, who could not easily have replaced them; and under 
these conditions their waste was imperceptible. When the 
Nautilus was ready to continue its submarine journey, I 
went down to the saloon. The panels were closed. ;'iid the 
course marked direct west. 

We were furrowing the waters of the Indian Ocean, a 
vast liquid plane, with a surface of 1,200,000,000 of acres, 
and whose waters are so clear and transparent, that any 
one leaning over them would turn giddy. The Nautilus 
usually floated between fifty and a hundred fathoms deep. 
We went on so for some days. To any one but myself, 
who had a great love for the sea, the hours would have 
seemed long and monotonous; but the daily walks on the 
platform, when I steeped myself in the reviving air of the 
ocean, the sight of the rich waters through the windows of 
the saloon, the books in the library, the compiling of my 
memoirs, took up all my time, and left me not a moment 
of ennui or weariness. 

For some days we saw a great number of aquatic birds, 
sea-mews or gulls. Some were cleverly killed and, pre- 
pared in a certain way, made very acceptable water-game. 
Amongst large winged birds, carried a long distance from 



14.0 ,_ LEAGUE; ''NUEIi "I UK ShAo. 

all hinds, and resting upon the vaves from the fatigue 
of their flight, I s:i\v some magniilcenfc albatrosses, utter- 
ing discordant cries like the braying of an ass. and birds 
belonging to the family of the longipennates. The family 
of the totipalmates was represented by the sea-swallows, 
which caught the fish from the surface, and by numerous 
phaetons, or lepturi; amongst others, the phaeton with 
red lines, as large as a pigeon, whose white plumage, 
tinted with pink, shows off to advantage the blackness of 
its wings. 

As to the fish, they always provoked our admiratic.c 
when we surprised the secrets of their aquatic life, through 
the open panels. I saw many kinds which I never before 
had a chance of observing. 

I shall notice chiefly ostracions peculiar to the Red Sea, 
the Indian Ocean, and that part which washes the coast 
of tropical America. These fishes, like the tortoise, the 
armadillo, the sea hedgehog, and the Crustacea, are pro- 
tected by a breastplate which is neither chalky nor stony, 
but real bone. In some it takes the form of a solid trian- 
gle, in others of a solid quadrangle. Amongst the trian- 
gular I saw some an inch and a half in length, with 
wholesome flesh and a delicious flavor; they are brown at 
the tail, and yellow at the fins, and I recommend their 
introduction into fresh water, which to a certain number 
of sea-fish easily accustom themselves. I would also 
mention quadrangular ostracions, having on the back four 
large tubercles; some dotted over with white spots on the 
lower part of the body, and which may be tamed like 
birds; trigons provided with spikes formed by the length- 
ening of their bony shell, and which from their strange 
gruntings are called "sea-pigs"; also dromedaries with 
large humps in the shape of a cone, whose flesh is very 
tough and leathery. 

I now borrow from the daily notes of Master Conseil. 
" Certain fish of the genus pretodon peculiar to those seas, 
with red backs and white chests, which are distinguished 
by three rows of longitudinal filament: and some electric- 
al, seven inches long, decked in the liveliest colors. 
Then, as specimens of other kinds, some ovoides, resem- 
bling an egg of a dark brown color, marked with white 
bands, and without tails; diodons, real sea-porcupine^ 
furnished with spikes, and capable of swelling, in such a 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 141 

way as to look like cushions bristling with darts; hippo- 
campi, common to every ocean; some pigasi with length- 
ened snouts, which their pectoral fins, being much 
elongated, and formed in the shape of wings, allow, if not 
to fly, at least to shoot into the air; pigeon spatula?, with 
tails covered with many rings of shell; macrognathi with 
long jaws, an excellent fish, nine inches long, and bright 
with most agreeable colors; pale-colored calliomores, with 
rugged heads; and plenty of chastodons, with long and 
tubular muzzles, which kill insects by shooting them, as 
from an air-gun, with a single drop of water. These we 
may call the fly catchers of the seas. 

'"' In the eighty-ninth genus of fishes, classed by Lace- 
pede, belonging to the second lower class of bony, charac- 
terized by opercules and bronchial membranes, I remarked 
the scorpsena, the head of which is furnished with spikes, 
and*. which has but one dorsal fin; these creatures are 
covered, or not, with little shells, according to the sub- 
class to which they belong. The second sub-class gives 
us specimens of didactyles fourteen or fifteen inches in 
length, with yellow rays, and heads of a most fantastic 
appearance. As to the first sub-class, it gives several 
specimens of that singular-looking fish appropriately called 
a 'sea-frog,' with large head, sometimes pierced with 
holes, sometimes swollen with protuberances, bristling 
with spikes and covered with tubercles; it has irregular 
and hideous horns; its body and tail are covered with 
callosities; its sting makes a dangerous wound; it is both 
repugnant and horrible to look at." 

From the 21st to the 23d of January, the Nautilus 
went at the rate of two hundred and fifty leagues in 
twenty-four hours, being five hundred and forty miles or 
twenty-two miles an hour. If we recognized so many 
different varieties of fish, it was because, attracted by the 
electric light, they tried to follow us; the greater part, 
however, were soon distanced by our speed, though some 
kept their pace in the waters of the Nautilus for a time. 
The morning of the 24th, in 1^ 5' south latitude, and 91 
3 longitude, we observed Keeling Island, a madrepore 
formation, planted with magnificent cocoas, and which 
had been visited by Mr. Darwin and Captain Fitzroy. 
The Nautilus skirted the sLores of this desert island for a 
little distance. Its nets brought up numerous specimens 



142 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

of polypi, and curious shells of mollusca. Some precious 
productions of the species of delphinulae enriched the 
treasures of Captain Nemo, to which I added an astraea 
punctifera, a kind of parasite polypus often found fixed 
to a shell. Soon Keeling Island disappeared from the 
horizon, and our course was directed to the northwest in 
the direction of the Indian Peninsula 

From Keeling Island our course was slower, and more 
variable, often taking us into great depths. Several times 
they made use of the inclined planes, which certain in- 
ternal levers placed obliquely to the water-line. In that 
way we went about two miles, but without ever obtaining 
the greatest depths of the Indian Sea, which soundings of 
seven thousand fathoms have never reached. As to the 
temperature of the lower strata, the thermometer invari- 
bly indicated 4 above zero. I only observed that, in the 
upper regions, the water was always colder in the high 
levels than at the surface of the sea. 

On the 25th of January, the ocean was entirely deserted ; 
the Nautilus passed the day on the surface, beating the 
waves with its powerful screw, and making them rebound 
to a great height. Who under such circumstances would 
not have taken it for a gigantic cetacean? Three parts of 
this day I spent on the platform. I watched the sea. 
Nothing on the horizon, till about four o'clock a steamer 
running west on our counter. Her masts were visible for 
an instant, butsheoould not see the Nautilus, being too 
low in the water. I fancied this steamboat belonged to 
the P. 0. Company, which runs from Ceylon to Sydney, 
touching at King George's Point and Melbourne. 

At five o'clock in the evening, before that fleeting twi- 
light which binds night to day in tropical zones, Conseil 
and I were astonished by a curious spectacle. 

It was a shoal of argonauts traveling along on the sur- 
face of the ocean. We could count several hundreds. 
They belonged to the tubercle kind which are peculiar to 
the Indian seas. These graceful molluscs moved back- 
ward bv means of their locomotive tube, through which 
they propelled the water already drawn in. Of their eight 
tentacles, six were elongated, and stre-tciied out floating on 
the water, whilst the other two, rolled up flat, were spread 
to the wind like a light sail. I saw their spiral-shaped 
and fluted shells, which Cuvier justly compares to an ele 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 143 

gant skiff. A boat indeed! It bears the creature which 
secretes it without its adhering to it. 

For nearly an hour the Nautilus floated in the midst of 
this shoal of molluscs. Then I know not what sudden 
fright they took; but as if at a signal every sail was furled, 
the arms folded, the body drawn in, the shells turned over, 
changing their center of gravity, and the whole fleet dis- 
appeared under the waves. Never did the ships of a squad- 
ron maneuver with more unity. 

At that moment night fell suddenly, and the reeds, 
scarcely raised by the breeze, lay peaceably under the sides 
of the Nautilus. 

The next day, 26th of January, we cut the equator at 
the eighty-second meridian, and entered the northern 
hemisphere. During Vhe day, a formidable troop of sharks 
accompanied us, terrible creatures, which multiply in these 
seas, and make them very dangerous. They were " ces- 
tracio philippi " sharks, with brown backs and whitish 
bellies, armed with eleven rows of teeth eyed sharks 
their throat being marked with a large black spot sur- 
rounded with white like an eye. There were also some 
Isabella sharks, with rounded snouts marked with dark 
spots. These powerful creatures often hurled themselves 
at the windows of the saloon with such violence as to 
make us feel very insecure. At such times Ned Land was 
no longer master of himself. He wanted to go to the 
surface and harpoon the monsters, particularly certain 
smooth-hound sharks, whose mouth is studded with teeth 
like a mosaic; and large tiger-sharks nearly six yards long, 
the last-named of which seemed to excite him more par- 
ticularly. But the Nautilus, accelerating her speed, easily 
left the most rapid of them behind. 

The 27fch of January, at the entrance of the vast Bay of 
Bengal, we met repeatedly a forbidding spectacle dead 
bodies floating on the surface of the water. They were 
the dead of the Indian villages, carried by the Ganges to 
the level of the sea, and which the vultures, the only un- 
dertakers of the country, had not been able to devour. 
But the sharks did not fail to help them at their funereal 
work. 

About seven o'clock in the evening, the Nautilus, half 
immersed, was sailing in a sea of milk. At first sight the 
ocean seemed lactified. Was it the effect of the lunar rays? 



144 20,000 LEAGUES UNDEll THE SEAS. 

No; for the moon, scarcely two days old, was still lying 
hidden under the horizon in the rays of the sun. The 
whole sky, though lit by the siderial rays, seemed black by 
contrast with the whiteness of the waters. 

Conseil could not believe his eyes, and questioned me as 
to the cause of this strange phenomenon. Happily I was 
able to answer him. 

"It is called a milk sea," I explained; "a large extent 
of white wavelets often to be seen on the coasts of Am- 
boyna, and in these parts of the sea." 

" But, sir," said Conseil, " can you tell me what causes 
such an effect? for I suppose the water is not really turned 
into milk." 

' No, my boy; and the whiteness which surprises you 
is caused only by the presence of myriads of infusoria, a 
sort of luminous little worm, gelatinous and without colors, 
of the thickness of a hair, and whose length is not more 
than seven one-thousandths of an inch. These insects ad- 
here to one another sometimes for several leagues." 

" Several leagues!" exclaimed Conseil. 

" Yes, my boy; and you need not try to compute the 
number of these infusoria. You will not be able; for, if 
I am not mistaken, ships have floated on these milk seas 
for more than forty miles." 

Toward midnight the sea suddenly resumed its usual 
color; but behind us, even to the limits of the hcriaon, 
the sky reflected the whitened waves, and for a long time 
scented impregnated with the vague glimmerings of an 
aurora borealis. 



