CHAPTER XX. 

FKOM LATITUDE 47 24' TO LONGITUDE 17 28'. 

IN consequence of the storm, we had been thrown east- 
ward once more. All hope of escape on the shores of 
New York or St. Lawrence had faded away; and poor 
Ned, in despair, had isolated himself like Captain Nemo. 
Conseil and I, however, never left each other. I said that 
the Nautilus had gone aside to the east. I should have 
said (to be more exact), the northeast. For some days it 
wandered, first on the surface, and then beneath it, amid 
those fogs so dreaded by sailors. What accidents are due 
to these thick fogs! What shocks upon these reefs when 
the wind drowns the breaking of- the waves! What collis- 
ions between vessels, in spite of their warning lights, 
whistles, and alarm-bells! And the bottoms of these seas 
look like a field of battle, where still lie all the conquered 
of the ocean; some old and already incrusted, others fresh 



274 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

and reflecting from their iron bunds and copper plates the 
brilliancy of our lantern. 

On the 15th of May we wore at the extreme south of 
the Bank of Newfoundland. This bank consists of 
alluvia, or large heaps of organic matter, brought either 
from the equator by the Gulf Stream, or from the North 
Pole by the counter-current of cold water which skirts the 
American coast. There aJso are heaped up those erratic 
blocks which are carried along by the broken ice; and 
close by a vast charnel-house of mollusks or zoophytes, 
which perish here by millions. The depth of the sea is nob 
great at Newfoundland not more than some hundreds of 
fathoms; but toward l^e mouth is a depression of 1,500 
fathoms. There the Gulf Stream widens. It loses some 
of its speed and some of its temperature, but it becomes a 
sea. 

It was on the 17th of May, about 500 miles from 
Heart's Content, at a depth of more than 1,400 fathoms, 
that I saw the electric cable lying on the bottom. Con- 
seil, to whom I had not mentioned it, thought at first that 
it was a gigantic sea-serpent. But I undeceived the 
worthy fellow, and by way of consolation related several 
particulars in the laying of this cable. The first one was 
laid in the years 1857 and 1858, but, after transmitting 
about 400 telegrams, would not act any longer. In 1863, 
the engineers constructed another one, measuring 2,000 
miles in length, and weighing 4,500 tons, which was 
embarked on the Great Eastern. This attempt also 
failed. 

On the 25th of May, the Nautilus being at a depth of 
more than 1,918 fathoms, was on the precise spot where 
the rupture occurred which ruined the enterprise. It 
was within 638 miles of the coast of Ireland; and at half- 
past two in the afternoon they discovered that communi- 
cation with Europe had ceased. The electricians on board 
resolved to cut the cable before fishing it up, and at eleven 
o'clock at night they had recovered the damaged part. 
They made another point and spliced it, and it was once 
more submerged. But some days after it broke again, 
and in the depths of the ocean could not be recaptured. 
The Americans, however, were not discouraged. Cyrus 
Field, the bold promoter of the enterprise, as lie had sunk 
alibis own fortune, set a new subscription on foot, whicb 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 2?5 

was at once answered, and another cable was constructed 
on better principles. The bundles of conducting wires 
were each enveloped in gutta-percha, and protected by a 
wadding of hemp, contained in a metallic covering. The 
Great Eastern sailed on the 13th of July, Ib66. The 
operation worked well. But one incident occurred. 
Several times in unrolling the cable they observed that 
nails had been recently forced into it, evidently with the 
motive of destroying it. Captain Anderson, the officers 
and engineers, consulted together, and had it posted up 
that if the offender was surprised on board, he would be 
thrown without further trial into the sea. From that 
time the criminal attempt was never repeated. 

On the 23d of July the Great Eastern was not more than 
500 miles from Newfoundland, when they telegraphed 
from Ireland news of the armistice concluded between 
Prussia and Austria, after Sadowa. On the 27th, in the 
midst of heavy fogs, they reached the port of Heart's Con- 
tent. The enterprise was successfully terminated; and 
for its first dispatch young America addressed old Europe 
in these words of wisdom so rarely understood: " Glory 
to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will to- 
ward men." 

I did not expect to find ihe electric cable in its primitive 
state, such as it was on leaving the manufactory. The long 
serpent, covered with the remains of shells, bristling with 
foraminiferas, was incrusted with a strong coating which 
served as a protection against all boring mollusks. It lay 
quietly sheltered from the motions of the sea, and under a 
favorable pressure for the transmission of the electric 
spark which passes from Europe to America in .32 of a 
second. Doubtless this cable will last for a great length 
of time, for they find that the gutta-percha covering is 
improved by the sea-water. Besides, on this level, so well 
chosen, the cable is never so deeply submerged as to cause 
it to break. The Nautilus followed it to the lowest depth, 
which was more than 2,212 fathoms, and there it lay with- 
out any anchorage, and then we reached the spot where 
the accident had taken place in 1863. The bottom of the 
ocean then formed a valley about 100 miles broad, in which 
Mont- Blanc might have been placed without its summit ap- 
pearing above the waves. This valley is closed at the east 
by a perpendicular wall more than 2,000 yards high. We 



276 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

arrived there on the 28th of May, and the Nautilus wai 
then not more than 120 miles from Ireland. 

Was Captain Nemo going to land on the British Isles? 
No. To my great surprise he made for the south, once more 
coming back toward European seas. In rounding the 
Emerald Isle, for one instant I caught sight of Cape Clear, 
and the light which guides the thousands of vessels leaving 
Glasgow or Liverpool. An important question then arose 
in my mind. Did the Nautilus dare entangle itself in the 
Mauch? Ned Land, who had reappeared since we had 
been nearing land, did not cease to question me. How 
could I answer? Captain Nemo remained invisible. After 
having shown the Canadian a glimpse of American shores, 
was he going to show me the coast of France? 

But the Nautilus was still going southward. On the 
30th of May,it passed in sight of the Land's End, be- 
tween the extreme point of England and the Scilly Isles, 
which were left to starboard. If he wished to enter the 
Mauch he must go straight to the east. He did not do so. 

During the whole of the 31st of May, che Nautilus de- 
scribed a series of circles on the water, which greatly in- 
terested me. It seemed to be seeking a spot it had some 
trouble in finding. At noon, Captain Nemo himself came 
to work the ship's log. He spoke no word to me, but 
seemed gloomier than ever. What could sadden him thus? 

Was it its proximity to European shores? Had bf some 
recollections of his abandoned country? If not, what did 
he feel? Eemorse or regret? For a long while this thought 
haunted my mind, and I had a kind of presentiment that 
before long chance would betray the captain's secrets. 

The next day, the 1st of June, the Nautilus continued the 
same process. It was evidently seeking some particular 
spot in the ocean. Captain Nemo took the sun's altitude as 
he had done the day before. The sea was beautiful, the sky 
clear. About eight miles to the east, a large steam-vessel 
could be discerned on the horizon. No flag fluttered from 
its mast, and I could not discover its nationality. Some 
minutes before the sun passed the meridian, Captain Nemo 
took his sextant, and watched wi-th great attention. The 
perfect rest of the water greatly helped the operation. The 
Nautilus was motionless; it neither rolled nor pitched. 

I was on the platform when the altitude was taken, and 
the captain pronounced these words: "It is here," 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 277 

He turned and went below. Had he seen the vessel 
which was changing its coarse and seemed to be nearing 
us? I could not tell. I returned to the saloon. The 
panels closed, I heard the hissing of the water in the 
reservoirs. The Nautilus began to sink, following a 
vertical line, for its screw communicated no motion to it. 
Some minutes later it stopped at a depth of more than 
420 fathoms, resting on the ground. The luminous ceil- 
ing was darkened, then the panels were opened, and 
through the glass I saw the sea brilliantly illuminated by 
rays of our lantern for at least half a mile round us. 

I looked to the port side, and saw nothing but an itvi- 
mensity of quiet waters. But to starboard, on the bottom 
appeared a large protuberance, which at once attracted my 
attention. One would have thought it a ruin buried 
under a coating of white shells, much resembling a cover- 
ing of snow. Upon examining the mass attentively, I 
could recognize the ever-thickening form of a vessel bare 
of its masts, which must have sunk. It certainly belonged 
to past times. This wreck, to be thus mcrusted with the 
lime of the water, must already be able to count many 
years at the bottom of the ocean. 

What was this vessel? Why did the Nautilus visit its 
tomb? Could it have been aught but a shipwreck which 
had drawn it under the water? I knew not what to 
think, when near me in a slow voice I heard Captain 
Nemo say: 

" At one time this ship was called the Marseillais. It 
carried seventy-four guns, and was launched in 1752. In 
1778, the 13th of August, commanded by La Poype- 
Vertrieux, it fought badly against the Preston. In 1779, 
on the 4th of July, it was at the taking of Grenada with 
the squadron of Admiral Estaing. In 1781, on the 5th of 
September, it took part in the battle of Comte de Grasse, 
in Chesapeake Bay. In 1794, the French Republic changed 
its name. On the 16th of April, in the satne 'year, it 
joined the squadron of Villaret Joyeuse, at Brest, being 
intrusted with the escort of a cargo of corn coming from 
America, under the command of Admiral Van StabeL On 
the llth and 12th Prairal of the second year, this squadron 
fell in with an English vessel. Sir, to-day is the 13th 
Prairal, the 1st of June, 1868. It is now seventy-four 
years ago, day for day on this very spot, in latitute 47 



278 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

24', longitude 17 28', that this vessel, after fighting heroic- 
ally, losing its three masts, with the water in its hold, 
and the third of its crew disabled, preferred sinking with 
its 356 sailors to surrendering; and nailing its colors to 
the poop, disappeared under the waves to the cry of ' Long 
live the Eepublic?'" 

" The Avenger!*' I exclaimed. 

"Yes, sir, the Avenger! A good name!" muttered 
Captain Nemo, crossing his arms. 



\ 



