CHAPTER XIV. 

A NOTE OF INVITATION. 

THE next day was the 9th of November. I awoke after 
a long sleep of twelve hours. Conseil came, according to 
custom, to know "how I had passed the night," and to 
offer his services. He had left his friend, the Canadian, 
sleeping like a man who had never done anything else all 
his life. I let the worthy fellow chatter as he pleased, 
without caring to answer him. I was preoccupied by the 
absence of the captain during our sitting of the day be- 
fore, and hoping to see him to-day. 

As soon as I was dressed I went into the saloon. It 
was deserted. 

I plunged into the study of the conchological treasures 
hidden behind the glasses. I reveled also in great herbals 
filled with the rarest marine plants, which, although dried 
up, retained their lovely colors. Amongst these precious 
hydrophytes I remarked some vorticellae, pavonariae, deli- 
cate ceramics with scarlet tints, some fan-shaped agari, 
and some natabuli like flat mushrooms, which at one time 
used to be classed as zoophytes; in short a perfect series 
of algae. 

The whole day passed without my being honored by a 
visit from Captain Nemo. The panels of the saloon did 
not open.. Perhaps they did not wish us to tire of these 
beautiful things. 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDEH THE SEAS. 75 

The course of the Nautilus was E.N.E., her speed twelve 
knots, the depth below the surface between twenty-five 
and thirty fathoms. 

The next day, 10th of November, the same desertion, the 
same solitude. I did not see one of the ship's crew: Ned 
and Conseil spent the greater part of the day with me. 
They were astonished at the inexplicable absence of the 
captain. Was this singular man ill? had he altered his 
intentions with regard to us?" 

After all, as Conseil said, we enjoyed perfect liberty, we 
were delicately and abundantly fed. Our host kept to his 
terms of the treaty. We could not complain, and, indeed, 
the singularity of our fate reserved such wonderful com- 
pensation for us, that we had no right to accuse it as yet. 

That day I commenced the journal of these adventures 
which has enabled me to relate them with more scrupu- 
lous exactitude and minute detail. I wrote it on paper 
made from the zostera marina. 

llth November, early in the morning. The fresh air 
spreading over the interior of the Nautilus, told me that 
we had come to the surface of the ocean to renew our sup- 
ply of oxygen. I directed my steps to the central stair- 
case, and mounted the platform. 

It was six o'clock, the weather was cloudy, the sea gray 
but calm. Scarcely a billow. Captain Nemo, whom I 
hoped to meet, would he be there? 1 saw no one but the 
steersman imprisoned in his glass cage. Seated upon the 
projection formed by the hull of the pinnace, I inhaled the 
salt breeze with delight. 

By degrees the fog disappeared under the action of the 
sun's rays, the radiant orb rose from behind the eastern 
horizon. The sea flamed under its glances like a train of 
gunpowder. The clouds scattered in the heights were 
colored with lively tints of beautiful shades, and numer- 
ous " mare's tails," which betokened wind for that day. 
But what was wind to this Nautilus, which tempests could 
not frighten? 

I was admiring this joyous rising of the sun, so gay, and 
go life-giving, when I heard steps approaching the plat- 
form. I was prepared to salute Captain Nemo, but it was 
his second (whom I had already seen on the captain's first 
visit) who appeared. He advanced on the platform, not 
geeming to see me. With his powerful glass to his eye hq 



76 20,000 LEAGUES UNDUE THE SEAS. 

scanned every point of the horizon with great attention. 
This examination over, he approached the panel and pro- 
nounced a sentence in exactly these terms. I have remem- 
bered it, for every morning it was repeated under exactly 
the same conditions. It was thus worded: 

"Nautron respoc lorni virch." 

What it meant I could not say. 

These words pronounced, the second descended. I 
thought that the Nautilus was about to return to its sub. 
marine navigation. I regained the panel and returned to 
my chamber. 

Five days sped thus, without any change in our situa- 
tion. Every morning I mounted the platform. The 
same phrase was pronounced by the same individual. But 
Captain Nemo did not appear. 

I had made up my mind that I should never see him 
again, when, on the 16th of November, on returning to 
my room with Ned and Conseil, I found upon my table a 
note addressed to me. I opened it impatiently. It was 
written in a bold, clear hand ; the characters rather 
pointed, recalling the German type. The note was worded 
as follows: 

" To PROFESSOR ARONNAX, on board the Nautilus. 

" 16th of November, 1867. 

" Captain Nemo invites Professor Aronnax to a hunting- 
party, which will take place to-morrow morning in the 
forests of the island of Crespo. He hopes that nothing 
will prevent the Professor from being present, and he will 
with pleasure see him joined by his companions. 

" CAPTAIN NEMO, Commander of the Nautilus." 

"A hunt!" exclaimed Ned. 

"And in the forests of the island of Crespo!" added 
Conseil. 

"0, then the gentleman is going on terra fir ma?" re- 
plied Ned Land. 

" That seems to me to be clearly indicated," said I, 
reading the letter once more. 

"Well, we must accept," said the Canadian. "But 
once more on dry ground, we shall know what to do. 
Indeed, I shall not be sorry to eat a piece of fresh ven- 
ison." 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 7"? 

Without seeking to reconcile what was contradictory be- 
tween Captain Nemo's manifest aversion to islands and 
continents, and his invitation to hunt in a forest, I con- 
tented myself with replying: 

" Let us first see where the island of Crespo is." 

I consulted the planisphere, and in 32 40' north lat., 
and 157 50' west long., I found a small island, recognized 
in 1801 by Captain Crespo, and marked in the ancient 
Spanish maps as Rocca de la Plata, the meaning of which 
is "The Silver Rock." We were then about eighteen 
hundred miles from our starting point, and the course of 
the Nautilus, a little changed, was bringing it back toward 
the southeast. I showed this little rock lost in the midst 
of the North Pacific to my companions. 

" If Captain Nemo does sometimes go on dry ground," 
said I, "he at least chooses desert islands." 

Ned Land shrugged his shoulders without speaking, and 
Conseil and he left me. 

After supper, which was served by the steward, mute and 
impassible, I. went to bed, not without some anxiety. 

The next morning, the 17th of November, on awakening, 
I felt that the Nautilus was perfectly still. I dressed 
quickly and entered the saloon. 

Captain Nemo was there, waiting for me. He rose, 
bowed, and asked me if it was convenient for me to ac- 
company him. As he made no allusion to his absence 
during the last eight days, I did not mention it, and 
simply answered that my companions and myself were 
ready to follow him. 

We entered the dining- room, where breakfast was 
served. 

" M. Aronnax," said the Captain, " pray share my 
breakfast without ceremony; we will chat as we eat. 
For, though I promised you a walk in the forest, I did 
net undertake to find hotels there. So breakfast as a 
man who will most likely not have his dinner till very 
late." 

I did honor to the repast. It was composed of several 
kinds of fish, and several slices of holothuridse (excellent 
zoophytes), and different sorts of sea-weed. Our drink 
consisted of pure water, to which the captain added some 
drops of a fermented liquor, extracted by the Kamtchatka 
method from a sea- weed known under the name of Rhodo* 



18 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

menia palmata. Captain Nemo ate at first without saying 
a word. Then he began: 

" Sir, when I proposed to you to hunt in my submarine 
forest of Crespo, you evidently thought me mad. Sir, 
you should never judge lightly of any man." 

"But, Captain, believe me " 

" Be kind enough to listen, and you will then see 
whether you have any cause to accuse me of folly and con- 
tradiction." 

" I listen." 

"You know as well "as I do, Professor, that man can 
live under water providing he carries with him a sufficient 
supply of breathable air. In submarine works the work- 
man, clad in an impervious dress, with his head in a metal 
helmet, receives air from above by means of forcing-pumps 
and regulators.' 

" That is a diving apparatus," said I. 

"Just so; but under these conditions the man is not 
at liberty; he is attached to the pump, which sends him 
air through an india-rubber tube, and if we were obliged 
to be thus held to the Nautilus, we could not go far." 

"And the means of getting free?" I asked. 

"It is to use the Kouquayrol apparatus, invented by 
two of your own countrymen, which I have brought to 
perfection for my own use, and which will allow you to 
risk yourself under these new physiological conditions, 
without any organ whatever suffering. It consists of a 
reservoir of thick iron plates, in which I store the air under 
a pressure of fifty atmospheres. This reservoir is fixed on 
the back by means of braces, like a soldier's knapsack. 
Its upper part forms a box in which the air is kept by 
means of a bellows, and therefore can not escape unless at 
its normal tension. In the Kouquayrol apparatus such as 
we use, two india-rubber pipes leave this box and join a 
sort of tent which holds -the nose and mouth; one is to 
introduce fresh air, the other to let out the foul, and the 
tongue closes one or the other according to the wants of 
the respirator. But I, in encountering great pressures at 
the bottom of the sea, was obliged to shut my head, like 
that of a diver,- in a ball of copper; and it is to this ball 
of copper that the two pipes, the inspirator and the ex- 
pirator, open." 

" Perfectly, Captain Nemo; but the air that you carry 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 79 

with you must soon be used; when it only contains fifteen 
per cent, of oxygen, it is no longer fit to breathe." 

"Right! but I told you, M. Arounax, that the pumps 
of the Nautilus allow me to store the air under consider- 
able pressure; and on those conditions, the reservoir of 
the apparatus can furnish breathable air for nine or ten 
hours." 

"I have no further objections to make," I answered; 
" I will only ask you one thing, Captain how can you 
light your road at the bottom of the sea?" 

" With the Rhumkorff apparatus, M. Aronnax; one is 
carried on the back, the other is fastened to the waist. 
It is composed of a Bun sen pile, which I do not work 
with bichromate of potash, but with sodium. A wire is 
introduced which collects the electricity produced, and 
directs it toward a particularly made lantern. In this 
'lantern is a spiral glass which contains a small quantity of 
carbonic gas. When the apparatus is at work, this gas 
becomes luminous, giving out a white and continuous light. 
Thus provided, I can breathe and I can see." 

" Captain Nemo, to all my objections you make such 
crushing answers, that I dare no longer doubt. But if I 
am forced to admit the Rouquayrol and Rhumkorff ap- 
paratus, I must be allowed some reservations with regard 
to the gun I am to carry." 

" But it is not a gun for powder," answered the Captain. 

" Then it is an air-gun?" 

"Doubtless! How would you have me manufacture 
gunpowder on board, without either saltpeter, sulphur, 
or charcoal?" 

"Besides," I added, " to fire under water in a medium 
eight hundred and fifty-five times denser than the air, we 
must conquer very considerable resistance." 

" That would be no difficulty. There exist guns, ac- 
cording to Fulton, perfected in England by Philip Coles 
and Burley, in France by Furcy, and in Italy by Landi, 
which are furnished with a peculiar system of closing, 
which can fire under these conditions. But I repeat, 
having no powder, I use air under great pressure, which 
the pumps of the Nautilus furnish abundantly." 

"But this air must be rapidly used?" 

" Well, have I not my Rouquayrol reservoir, which can 
furnish it at need? A tap is all that is required. Beside*, 



80 20,000 LEAGUES UN DEE THE SEAS. 

M. Aronnax, you must see yourself that, during our sub- 
marine hnnt, we can spend but little air and but few 
balls." 

"But it seems to me that in this twilight, and in the 
midst of this fluid, which is very dense compared with 
the atmosphere, shots could not go far nor easily prove 
mortal." 

" Sir, on the contrary, with this gun every blow is 
mortal; and however lightly the animal is touched, it falls 
as if struck by a thunderbolt." 

"Why?" 

" Because the balls sent by this gun are not ordinary 
balls, but little cases of glass (invented by Leniebroek, an 
Austrian chemist), of which I have a large supply. These 
glass cases are covered with a case of steel, and weighted 
with a pellet of lead; they are real Leyden bottles, into 
which the electricity is forced to a very high tension. 
With the slightest shock they are discharged, and the 
animal, however strong it may be, falls dead. I must tell 
you that these cases are size number four, and that the 
charge for an ordinary gun would be ten." 

" I will argue no longer," I replied, rising from the table; 
"I have nothing left me but to take my gun. At all 
events, I will go where you go." 

Captain Nemo then let me aft; and in passing before 
Ned and Conseil's cabin, I called my two companions, who 
followed immediately. We then came to a kind of cell 
pear the machinery-room, in which we were to put on our 
walking-dress. 



