CHAPTER X. 

THE SUBMARINE COAL-MINES. 

THE next day, the 20th of February, I awoke very late; 
the fatigues of the previous night had prolonged my 
sleep until eleven o'clock. I dressed quickly, and 
hastened to find the course the Nautilus was taking. The 
instruments showed it to be still toward the south, with 
;i speed of twenty miles an hour, and a depth of fifty 
fathoms. 

.The species of fish here did not differ much from those 
already noticed. There were rays of giant size, five yards 
long, and endowed with great muscular strength, which 
enabled them to shoot above the waves; sharks of many 
kinds, amongst others a glaucus fifteen feet long, with 
triangular sharp teeth, and whose transparency rendered 
it almost invisible in the water; brown sagrse; humantins, 
prism-shaped and clad with a tuberculous hide, stur- 
geons, resembling their congeners of the Mediterranean; 
trumpet syngnathes, a foot and a half long, furnished 
with grayish bladders, without teeth or tongue, and as 
supple as snakes. 

Amongst bony fish, Conseil noticed some blackish ma- 
kairas, about three yards long, armed at the upper jaw 
with a piercing sword; other bright-colored creatures, 
known at the time of Aristotle by the name of the sea- 
dragon, which are dangerous to capture on account of the 
spikes on their back; also some coryphenes, with brown 
backs marked with little blue stripes, and surrounded 
with a gold border; some beautiful dorades; and sword- 
fish four-and-twenty feet long, swimming in troops, fierce 
animals, but rather herbivorous than carnivorous. 

About four o'clock the soil, generally composed of a 
thick mud mixed with petrified wood, changed by degrees, 
and it became more stony, and seemed strewn with con- 
glomerate and pieces of basalt, with a sprinkling of lava 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 203 

and sulphurous obsidian. I thought a mountainous region 
was succeeding the long plains; and accordingly, after a 
few evolutions of the Nautilus, I saw the southerly horizon 
blocked by a high wall which seemed to close all exit. 
Its summit evidently passed the level of the ocean. It 
must be a continent, or at least an island one of the 
Canaries or of the Cape Verd Islands. The bearings not 
being yet taken, perhaps designedly, I was ignorant of our 
exact position. In any case, such a wall seemed to me to 
mark the limits of that Atlantis of which we had in reality 
pass' .1 over only the smallest part. 

Much longer should I have remained at the window ad- 
miring the beauties of sea and sky, but the panels closed. 
At this moment the Nautilus arrived at the side of this 
high perpendicular wall. What it would do I could not 
guess. I returned to my room; it no longer moved. I laid 
myself down with the full intention of waking after a few 
hours' sleep; but it was eight o'clock the next day when I 
entered the saloon. I looked at the manometer. It told 
me that the Nautilus was floating on the surface of the 
ocean. Besides, I heard steps on the platform. I went 
to the panel. It was open; but instead of broad daylight, 
as I expected, I was surrounded by profound darkness. 
Where were we? Was I mistaken? Was it still night? 
No, not a star was shining, and night has not that utter 
darkness. 

I knew not what to think, when a voice near me said: 

" Is that you, Professor?" 

" Ah! Captain," I answered: " where are we?" 

" Under ground, sir." 

"Under ground!" I exclaimsd. ' e And the Nautilus 
floating still?" 

" It always floats." 

" But I do not understand." 

" Wait a few minutes, our lantern will be lit, and if you 
like light places, you will be satisfied." 

I stood on the platform and waited. The darkness was 
so complete that I could not even see Captain Nemo; but 
looking to the zenith, exactly above my head, I seemed to 
catch an undecided gleam, a kind of twilight filling a cir- 
cular hole. At this instant the lantern was lit, and its 
vividness dispelled the faint light. I closed my dazzled 
eyes for an instant, and then looked again. The Nautilus 



204 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE 8BAS. 

was stationary, floating near a mountain which formed a sort 
of quay. The lake then supporting it wa a lake im- 
prisoned by a circle of walls, measuring two miles in diam- 
eter and six in circumference. Its level (the manometer 
showed) could only be the same as the outside level, for 
there must necessarily be a communication between the 
lake and the sea. The high partitions, leaning forward on 
their base, grew into a vaulted roof bearing the shape of 
an immense funnel turned upside down, the height being 
about five or six hundred yards. At the summit was a cir- 
cular orifice, by which 1 had caught the slight gleam of 
light, evidently daylight. 

"Where are we?" I asked. 

" In the very heart of an extinct volcano, the interior 
of which has been invaded by the sea after some great 
convulsion of the earth. Whilst you were sleeping, Pro- 
fessor, the Nautilus penetrated to this lagoon by a natural 
canal, which opens about ten yards beneath the surface of 
the ocean. This is its harbor of refuge, a sure, com- 
modious, and mysterious one, sheltered from all gales. 
Show me, if you can, on the coasts of any of your conti- 
nents or islands, a road which can give such perfect refuge 
from all storms." 

"Certainly," I replied, " you are in safety here, Captain 
Nemo. Who could reach you in the heart of a volcano? 
But did I not see an opening at its summit?" 

" Yes; its crater, formerly filled with lava, vapor, and 
flames, and which now gives entrance to the lifegiving air 
we breathe." 

" But what is this volcanic mountain?" 

" It belongs to one of the numerous islands with which 
this sea is strewn to vessels a simple sand-bank to us an 
immense cavern. Chance led me to discover it, and chance 
served me well." 

"But of what use is this refuge, Captain? The Nau- 
tilus wants no port." 

"No, sir; but it wants electricity to make it move, and 
the wherewithal to make the electricity sodium to feed 
the elements, coal from which to get the sodium, and a 
coal-mine to supply the coal. And exactly on this spot 
the sea covers entire forests embedded during the geolog- 
ical periods, now mineralized, and transformed into coal; 
for me they are an inexhausti ble mine." 



20,000 LEAGUES UKDER THE SEAS. 206 

"Your men follow the trade of miners here, then, 

Captain?" 

"Exactly so. These mines extend under the wavesjlike 
the mips of Newcastle. Here, in their diving-dresses, 
pickax and shovel in hand, my men extract the coal, 
which 1 do not even ask from the mines of the earth. 
When I burn this combustible for the manufacture of 
sodium, the smoke, escaping from thecrator of the mount- 
ain, gives it the appearance of a still active volcano." 

"And we shall see your companions at work?" 

" No; not this time at least; for lam in a hurry to con- 
tinue our submarine tour of the earth. Sol shall content 
myself with drawing from the reserve of sodium I already 
possess. The time for loading is one day only, and we 
continue our voyage. So if you wish to go over the 
cavern, and make the round of the lagoon, you must take 
advantage of to-day, M. Aronnax." 

I thanked the captain, and went to look for my com- 
panions, who had not yet left their cabin. J invited them 
to follow me without saying where we were. They 
mounted the platform. Conseil, who was astonished at 
nothing, seemed to look upon it as quite natural that he 
should wake under a mountain, after having fallen asleep 
under the waves. But Ned Land thought of nothing but 
finding whether the cavern had any exit. After breakfast, 
about ten o'clock, we went down on to the mountain. 

" Here we are, once more on land," said Conseil. 

"I do not call this land," said the Canadian. "And 
besides, we are not on it, but beneath it." 

Between the walls of the mountain and the waters of the 
lake lay a sandy shore, which, at its greatest (breadth, 
measured five hundred feet. On this soil one might easily 
make the tour of the lake. But the base of the high parti- 
tions was stony ground, with volcanic blocks and enormous 
pumice-stones lying in picturesque heaps. All these de- 
tached masses, covered with enamel, polished by the action 
of the subterraneous fires, shone resplendent by the light 
of our electric lantern. The mica-dust from the shore, 
rising under our feet, flew like a cloud of sparks. The 
bottom now rose sensibly, and we soon arrived at long cir- 
cuitous slopes, or inclined planes, which took us higher 
by degrees; but we were obliged to walk carefully among 
these conglomerates, bound by no current; the feet (dip- 



206 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

ping on the glassy trachyte, composed of crystal, feldspar 
and quartz. 

The volcanic nature of this enormous excavation was 
confirmed on all sides, and I pointed it out to my compan- 
ions. 

" Picture to yourselves," said I, " what this crater must 
have been when filled with boiling lava, and when the 
level of the incandescent liquid rose to the orifice of the 
mountain, as though melted on the top of a hot plate." 

"I can picture it perfectly," said Conseil. "But, sir, 
will you tell me why the Great Architect has suspended 
operations, and how it is that the furnace is replaced by 
the quiet waters of the lake?" 

" Most probably, Conseil, because some convulsion be- 
neath the ocean produced that very opening which has 
served as a passage for the Nautilus. Then the water 
of the Atlantic rushed into the interior of the mountain. 
There must have been a terrible struggle between two ele- 
ments, a struggle which ended in the victory of Neptune. 
But many ages have run out since then, and the sub- 
merged volcano is now a peaceable grotto." 

" Very well," replied Ned Land; " I accept the expla- 
nation, sir; but, in our own interests, I regret that th&lt;5 
opening of which you speak was not made above the level 
of the sea." 

" But, friend Ned," said Conseil, " if the passage had 
not been under the sea, the Nautilus could not have gone 
through it." 

We continued ascending. The steps became more and 
more perpendicular and narrow. Deep excavations, which 
we were obliged to cross, cut them here and there; slop- 
ing masses had to be turned. We slid upon our knees 
and crawled along. But Conseil's dexterity and the 
Canadian's strength surmounted all obstacles. At a 
height of about thirty-one feet, the nature of the ground 
changed without becoming more practicable. To the 
conglomerate and trachyte succeeded black basalt, the first 
dispread in layers full of bubbles, the latter forming regu- 
lar prisms, placed like a colonnade supporting the spring 
of the immense vault, an admirable specimen of natural 
architecture. Between the blocks of basalt wound long 
streams of lava, long since grown cold, incrusted with 
bituminous rays; and in some places there were spread 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 207 

large carpets of sulphur. A more powerful light shone 
through the upper crater, shedding a vague glimmer over 
these volcanic depressions forever buried in the bosom of 
this extinguished mountain. But our upward march was 
soon stopped at a height of about two hundred and fifty 
feet by impassable obstacles. There was a complete 
vaulted arch overhanging us, and our ascent was changed 
to a circular walk. At the last change vegetable life be- 
gan to struggle with the mineral. Some shrubs, and even 
some trees, grew from the walls. I recognized some 
euphorbias, with the caustic sugar coming from them; 
heliotropes, quite incapable of justifying their name, sadly 
drooped their clusters of flowers, both their color and per- 
fume half gone. Here and there some chrysanthemums 
grew timidly at the foot of an aloe with long sickly-look- 
ing leaves. But between trie streams of lava, I saw some 
little violets still slightly perfumed, and I admit that I 
smelt them with delight. Perfume is the soul of the 
flower, and sea-flowers, those splendid hydrophytes, have 
no soul. 

We had arrived at the foot of some sturdy dragon-trees, 
which had pushed aside the rocks with their strong roots, 
when Ned Land exclaimed: 

"Ah! sir, a hive! a hive!" 

"A hive!" I replied with a gesture of incredulity. 

" Yes, a hive," repeated the Canadian, " and bees hum- 
ming round it." 

I approached, and was bound to believe my own eyes. 
There, at a hole bored in one of the dragon-trees, were 
some thousands of these ingenious insects, so common in 
all the Canaries, and whose produce is so much esteemed. 
Naturally enough, the Canadian wished to gather the 
honey, and I could not well oppose his wish. A quantity 
of dry leaves, mixed with sulphur, he lit with a spark 
from his flint, and he began to smoke out the bees. The 
humming ceased by degrees, and the hive eventually 
yielded several pounds of the sweetest honey, with which 
Ned Land filled his haversack. 

" When I have mixed this honey with the paste of the 
artocarpus," said he, "I shall be able to offer you a suc- 
culent cake."' 

"Upon my word," said Conseil, "it will be ginger- 
bread." 



208 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

" Never mind the gingerbread," said I; " let us continue 
our interesting walk." 

At every turn of the path we were following, the lake 
appeared in all its length and breadth. The lantern lit up 
the whole of its peaceable surface which knew neither 
ripple nor wave. The Nautilus remained perfectly im- 
movable. On the platform, and on the mountain, the 
ship's crew were working like black shadows, clearly 
carved against the luminous atmosphere. "We were now 
going round the highest crest of the first layers oi rock 
which upheld the roof. I then saw that bees were not the 
only representatives of the animal kingdom in the interior 
of this volcano. Birds of prey hovered here and there in 
the shadows, or fled from their nests on the top of the 
rocks. There were sparrow-hawks with white breasts, and 
kestrels, and down the slopes scampered, with their long 
legs, several fine fat bustards. I leave any one to imagine 
the covetousness of the Canadian at the sight of this savory 
game, and whether he did not regret having no gun. But 
he did his best to replace the lead by stones, and after 
several fruitless attempts, he succeeded in wounding a 
magnificent bird. To say that he risked his life twenty 
times before reaching it, is but the truth; but he managed 
so well, that the creature joined the honey cakes in his 
bag. We were now obliged to descend toward the shore, 
the crest becoming impracticable. Above us the crater 
seemed to gape like the mouth of a well. From this place 
the sky could be clearly seen, and clouds, dissipated by the 
west wind, leaving behind them, even on the summit of 
the mountain, their misty remnants certain proof that 
they were only moderately high, for the volcano did not 
rise more than eight hundred feet above the level of the 
ocean. Half an hour after the Canadian's last exploit we 
had regained the inner shore. Here the flora was rep- 
resented by large carpets of marine crystal, a little um- 
belliferous plant very good to pickle, which also bears the 
name of pierce-stone, and sea-fennel. Conseil gathered 
some bundles of it. As to the fauna, it might be counted 
by thousands of Crustacea of all sorts, lobsters, crabs, 
palsemons, spideip-crabs, chameleon shrimps, and a large 
number of shells, rockfish and limpets. Three-quarters 
of an hour later we had finishea our circuitous wait, and 
were on board. The crew had just finished loading the 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 209 

sodium, and the Nautilus could have left that instant. 
But Captain Nemo gave no order. Did he wish to wait 
until night, and leave the submarine passage secretly? 
Perhaps so. Whatever it might be, the next day the 
Nautilus, having left its port, steered clear of all land at a 
few yards beneath the waves of the Atlantic. 



