CHAPTER VII. 

THE MEDITERRANEAN IN FORTY-EIGHT HOUES. 

THE Mediterranean, the blue sea par excellence, "the 
great sea " of the Hebrews, " the sea " of the Greeks, the 
"mare nostrum" of the Romans, bordered by orange- 
trees, aloes, cacti, and sea-pines; embalmed with the per- 
fume of the myrtle, surrounded by rude mountains, sat- 
urated with pure and transparent air, but incessantly 
Avorked by underground fires, a perfect battle-field in 
which Neptune and Pluto still dispute the empire of the 
world! 

It is upon these banks,'and on these waters/says Michelet, 
that man is renewed in one of the most powerful climates 
of the globe. But beautiful as it was, I could only take a 
rapid glance at the basin whose superficial area is two 
millions of square yards, Even Captain Nemo's knowl- 



183 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

edge was lost to me, for this enigmatical person did not 
appear once during our passage at full speed. I estimated 
the course which the Nautilus took under the waves of 
the sea at about six hundred leagues, and it was accom- 
plished in forty-eight hours. Starting on the morning of 
the 16th of February from the shores of Greece, we had 
crossed the Straits of Gibraltar by sunrise on the 18th. 

It was plain to me that this Mediterranean, inclosed in 
the midst of those countries which he wished to avoid, 
was distasteful to Captain Nemo. Those waves and those 
breezes brought back too many remembrances, if not too 
many regrets. Here he had no longer that independence 
and that liberty of gait which he had when in the open 
seas, and his Nautilus felt itself cramped between the close 
shores of Africa and Europe. 

Our speed was now twenty-five miles an hour. Itlhay 
be well understood that Ned Land, to his great disgust, 
was obliged to renounce his intended flight. He could 
not launch the pimiace, going at the rate of twelve or 
thirteen yards every second. To quit the Nautilus undei- 
such conditions would be as bad as jumping from a train 
at full speed an imprudent thing, to say the least of it. 
Besides, our vessel only mounted to the surface of the 
waves at night to renew its stock of air; it was steered 
entirely by the compass and the log. 

I saw no more of the interior of this Mediterranean than 
a traveler by express train perceives of the landscape 
which flies before his eyes; that is to say, the distant hori- 
zon, and not the nearer objects which pass like a flash of 
lightning. 

In the midst of the mass of waters brightly lit up by 
the electric light glided some of those lampreys, more than 
a yard long, common to almost every climate. Some of 
the oxyrhynchi, a kind of ray five feet broad, with white 
belly and gray spotted back, spread out like a large shawl 
carried along by the current. Other rays passed so quickly 
that I could not see if they deserved the name of eagles 
which was given to them by the ancient Greeks, or the 
qualification of rats, toads, and bats with which modern 
fishermen have loaded them. A few milander sharks, 
twelve feet long, and much feared by divers, struggled 
amongst them. Sea- foxes eight feet long, endowed with 
wonderful fineness of scent, appeared like large blue 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 183 

shadows. Some dorados of the shark kind, some of which 
measured seven feet and a half, showed themselves in 
their dress of blue and silver, encircled by small bands 
which struck sharply against the somber tints of their fins, 
a fish consecrated to Venus, the eyes of which are incased 
in a socket of gold; a precious species, friend of all waters, 
fresh or salt, an inhabitant of rivers, lakes, and oceans, 
living in all climates, and bearing all temperatures; a race 
belonging to the geological era of the earth, and which 
has preserved all the beauty of its first days. Magnificent 
sturgeons, nine or ten yards long, creatures of great speed, 
striking the panes of glass with their strong tails, dis- 
played their bluish backs with small brown spots; they 
resemble the sharks, but are not equal to them in strength, 
anc^are to be met with in all seas. But of all the diverse 
inhabitants of the Mediterranean, those I observed to the 
greatest advantage, when the Nautilus approached the 
surface, belonged to the sixty-third genus of bony fish. 
They were a kind of tunny, with bluish black backs, and 
silvery breastplates, whose dorsal fins threw out sparkles 
of gold. They are said to follow in the wake of vessels, 
whose refreshing shade they seek from the fire of a tropi- 
cal sky, and they did not belie the saying, for they accom- 
panied the Nautilus as they did in former times the vessel 
of La Perouse, For many a long hour they struggled to 
keep up with our vessel. I was never tired of admiring 
these creatures really built for speed their small heads, 
their bodies lithe and cigar-shaped, which in some were 
more than three yards long, their pectoral fins, and forked 
tail endowed with remarkable strength. They swam in a 
triangle, like certain flocks of birds, whose rapidity they 
equaled, and of which the ancients used to say that they 
understood geometry and strategy. But still they do not 
escape the pursuit of the provei^als, who esteem them as 
highly as the inhabitants of the Propontis and of Italy 
used to do; and these precious but blind and foolhardy 
creatures perish by millions in the nets of the Marseil- 
laise. 

With regard to the species of fish common to the At- 
lantic and the Mediterranean, the giddy speed of the 
Nautilus prevented me from observing them with any de- 
gree of accuracy. 

As to marine mammals, I thought, in passing the en- 



184 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

trance of the Adriatic, that I saw two or three cachalots, 
furnished with one dor.sul fin, of the genus physetera, 
some dolphins of the genus globicephali, peculiar to the 
Mediterranean, the back part of the head being marked 
like a zebra with small lines; also a dozen of seals, with 
white bellies and black hair, known by the name of monks, 
and which really have the air of a Dominican; they are 
about three yards in length. 

As to zoophytes, for some instants I was able to admire 
a beautiful orange galeolaria, which had fastened itself to 
the port panel; it held on by a long filament, and was 
divided into an infinity of branches, terminated by the 
finest lace which could ever have been woven by the rivals 
of Arachne herself. Unfortunately, I could not take this 
specimen; and doubtless no other Mediterranean zoophyte 
would have offered itself to my observation, if on the 
night of the sixteenth, the Nautilus had not,, singularly 
enough, slackened its speed, under the following circum- 
stances: 

We were then passing between Sicily and the coast of 
Tunis. In the narrow space between Cape Bon and the 
Straits of Messina, the bottom of the sea rose almost sud- 
denly. There was a perfect bank, on which there was not 
more than nine fathoms of water, whilst on either side the 
depth was ninety fathoms. 

The Nautilus had to maneuver very carefully so as not 
to strike against this submarine barrier. 

I showed Conseil on the map of the Mediterranean the 
spot occupied by this reef. 

" But if you please, sir," observed Conseil, " it is like a 
real isthmus joining Europe to Africa." 

" Yes, my boy, it forms a perfect bar to the Straits of 
Lybia, and the soundings of Smith have proved that in 
former times the continents between Cape Boco and Cape 
Furina were joined." 

" I can well believe it," said Conseil. 

" I will add," I continued, "that a similar barrier exists 
between Gibraltar and Ceuta, which in geological times 
formed the entire Mediterranean." 

" What if some volcanic burst should one day raise these 
two barriers above the waves?" 

"It is not probable, Conseil." 

"Well, but allow me to finish, please, sir; if this phe- 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 185 

nomenon should take place, it will be troublesome for 
M. Lcsseps, who has taken so much pains to pierce the 
isthmus." 

"I agree with you; but I repeat, Conseil, this phenom- 
enon will never happen. The violence of subterranean 
force is ever diminishing. Volcanoes so plentiful in the 
first days of the world, are being extinguished by degrees; 
the internal heat is weakened, the temperature of the 
lower strata of the globe is lowered by a perceptible quan- 
tity every century to the detriment of our git&gt;be, for its 
heat is its life." j T 

"But the sun?" 

" The sun is not sufficient, Conseil. Can it give heat to 
a dead body?" 

"Not that I know of." 

"Well, my friend, this earth will one day be that cold 
corpse; it will become uninhabitable and uninhabited like 
the moon, which has long since lost all its vital heat." 

"In how many centuries?" 

"In some hundreds of thousands of years, my boy." 

" Then," said Conseil, " we shall have time to finish our 
journey, that is, if Ned Land does not interfere with it." 

And Conseil, reassured, returned to the study of the 
bank, which the Nautilus was skirting at a moderate speed. 

There, beneath the rocky and volcanic bottom, lay .out- 
spread a living flora of sponges and reddish cydippes, which 
emitted a slight phosphorescent light, commonly known 
by the name of sea-cucumbers; and walking comatulae 
more than a yard long, the purple of which completely 
colored the water around. 

The Nautilus having now passed the high bank in the 
Lybian Straits, returned to the deep waters and its accus- 
tomed speed. 

From that time no more molluscs, no more articulates, 
no more zoophytes; barely a few large fish passing like 
shadows. 

During the night of the 16th and 17th February, we 
had entered the second Mediterranean basin, the greatest 
depth of which was 1,450 fathoms. The Nautilus, by the 
action of its screw, slid down the inclined planes, and 
buried itself in the lowest depths of the sea. 

On the 18th of February, about three o'clock in the 
morning, we were at the entrance of the Straits of Gib- 



186 20,000 LKAUUKS UNDKR 'J1IE SKAS. 

raltar. There once existed two currents, an upper one&gt; 
long since recognized, which conveys the waters of the 
ocean into the basin of the Mediterranean; and a lower 
counter-current, which reasoning has now shown to exist. 
Indeed, the volume of water in the Mediterranean, inces- 
santly added to by the waves of the Atlantic, and by rivers 
falling into it, would each year raise the level of this sea, 
for its evaporation is not sufficient to restore the equilib- 
rium. As it is not so, we must necessarily admit the ex- 
istence of an under-current, which empties into the basin 
of the Atlantic, through the Straits of Gibraltar, the sur- 
plus waters of the Mediterranean. A fact, indeed; and it 
was this counter-current by which the Nautilus profited. 
It advanced rapidly by the narrow pass. For one instant 
I caught a glimpse of the beautiful ruins of the temple of 
Hercules, buried in the ground, according to Pliny, and 
with the low island which supports it; and a few minutes 
later we were floating on the Atlantic. 



