CHAPTER XVI. 

A SUBMARINE FOREST. 

WE had at last arrived on the borders of this forest, 
doubtless one of the finest of Captain Nemo's immense 
domains. He looked upon it as his own, and considered 
he had the same right over it that the first men had in 
the first days of the world. And, indeed, who would 
have disputed with him the possession of this submarine 
property? What other hardier pioneer would come, hatchet 
in hand, to cut down the dark copses? 

This forest was composed of large tree-plants: and the 
moment we penetrated under its vast arcades, I was struck 
by the singular position of their branches a position I 
had not yet observed. 

Not an herb which carpeted the ground, not a branch 
which clothed the trees, was either broken or bent, nor 
did they extend horizontaly; all stretched up to the sur- 
face of the ocean. Not a filament, not a ribbon, however 
thin they might be, but kept as straight as a rod of iron. 
The fuci and llianas grew in rigid perpendicular lines, due 



86 20,000 LEAGUES UNDEK THE SEAS. 

to the density of the element which had produced them. 
Motionless, yet, when bent to one side by the hand, they 
directly resumed their former position. Truly it was the 
region of perpendicularity! 

I soon accustomed myself to this fantastic position, as 
well as to the comparative darkness which surrounded us. 
The soil of the forest seemed covered with sharp blocks, 
difficult to avoid. The submarine flora struck me as be- 
ing very perfect, and richer even than it would have been 
in the arctic or tropical zones, where these productions 
are not so plentiful. But for some minutes I involun- 
tarily confounded the genera, taking zoophytes for hydro- 
phytes, animals for plants; and who would not have been 
mistaken? The fauna and the flora are too clo sely allied 
in this submarine world. 

These plants are self-propagated, and the principle of 
their existence is in the water, which upholds and nourishes 
them. The greater number, instead of leaves, shoot forth 
blades of capricious shapes comprised within a scale of 
colors pink, carmine, green, olive, fawn and brown. I 
saw there (but not dried up, as our specimens of the Nau- 
tilus are) pavonari spread like a fan, as if to catch the 
breeze; scarlet ceramics, whose Jamiuaries extended their 
edible shoots of fern-shaped nereocysti, which grow to a 
height of fifteen feet; clusters of acetabuli, whose stems in- 
crease in size upward; and numbers of other marine plants, 
all devoid of flowers! 

" Curious anomaly! fantastic element!" said an ingeni- 
ous naturalist, " in which the animal kingdom blossoms, 
and the vegetable does not!" 

Under these numerous shrubs (as large as trees of the 
temperate zone), and under their damp shadow, were 
massed together real bwsh.es of living flowers, hedges of 
zoophytes, on which blossomed some zebra meandrines, 
with crooked grooves; some yellow caryophylliae; and, to 
complete the illusion, the fish-flies flew from branch to 
branch like a swarni of humming-birds; whilst yellow 
lepisacomthi, with bristling jaws, dactylopteri, and mono- 
centrides rose at our feet like a flight of snipes. 

In about an hour Captain Nemo gave the signal to halt. 
1, for my part, was not sorry; and we stretched ourselves 
under an arbor of alarise, the long thin blades of which 
stood up like arrows. , 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 87 

This short rest seemed delicious to me; there was nothing 
wanting but the charm of conversation; but impossible to 
speak, impossible to answer, I only put my great copper 
head to Conseil's. T saw the worthy fellow's eyes glisten- 
ing with delight, and to show his satisfaction, he shook 
himself in his breastplate of air in the most comical way 
in the world. 

After four hours of this walking I was surprised not to 
find myself dreadfully hungry. How to account for this 
state of the stomach I could not tell. But instead, I felt 
an insurmountable desire to sleep, which happens to all 
divers; and my eyes soon closed behind the thick glasses, 
and I fell into a hefcvy slumber, which the movement alone 
had prevented before. Captain Nemo and his robust com- 
panion, stretched in the clear crystal, set us the example. 

How long I remained buried in this drowsiness, I can- 
not judge; but, when I woke, the sun seemed sinking 
toward the horizon. Captain Nemo had already risen, 
and I was beginning to stretch my limbs, when an unex- 
pected apparition brought me briskly to my feet. 

A few steps off, a monster sea-spider, about thirty -eight 
inches high, was watching me with squinting eyes, ready to 
spring upon me. Though my diver's dress was thick 
enough to defend me from the bite of this animal, I could 
not help shuddering with horror. Conseil and the sailors 
of the Nautilus awoke at this moment. Captain Nemo 
pointed out the hideous crustacean, which a blow from 
the butt-end of the gun knocked over, and I saw the 
claws of the horrible monster writhe in terrible convul- 
sions. This accident reminded me that other animals 
more to be feared might haunt these obscure depths, 
against whose attacks my diving-dress would not protect 
me. I had never thought of it before, but I now resolved 
to be upon my guard. Indeed, I thought this halt would 
mark the termination of our walk; but I was mistaken, 
for, instead of returning to the Nautilus, Captain Nemo 
continued his bold excursion. The ground was still on 
the incline, its declivity seemed to be getting greater, and 
to be leading us to greater depths. It must have been 
about three o'clock when we reached a narrow valley, 
between high, perpendicular walls, situated about seventy- 
five fathoms deep. Thanks to the perfection of our appa- 
ratus, we are forty-five fathoms below the limit which 



88 30,000 LEAGUES UtfDER THE SEAS. 

nature seems to have imposed on man as to his subm- 
arine excursions. 

I say seventy- fire fathoms, though I had no instrument 
by which to judge the distance. But I know that even 
in the clearest waters the solar rays could not penetrate 
further. And accordingly the darkness deepened. At 
ten paces not on object was visible. I was groping my 
way, when I suddenly saw a brilliant white light. Cap- 
tain Nemo had just put his electric apparatus into use; 
his companion did the same, and Conseil and I followed 
their example. By turning a screw I established a com- 
munication between the wire and the spiral glass, and the 
sea, lit by our four lanterns, was illuminated for a circle 
of thirty-six yards. 

Captain Nemo was still plunging into the dark depths 
of the forest, whose trees were getting sparcer at every 
step. I noticed that vegetable life disappeared sooner 
than animal life. The medusae had already abandoned 
the arid soil, from which a great number of animals, 
zoophytes, molluscs, and fishes, still obtained suste- 
nance. 

As we walked, I thought the light of our KuhmkorfE 
apparatus could not fail to draw some inhabitant from its 
dark couch. But if they did approach us they at least 
kept a respectful distance from the hunters. Several times 
I saw Captain Nemo stop, put his gun to his shoulder, 
and after some moments drop it and walk on. At last, 
after about four hours, this marvelous excursion came to 
an end. A wall of superb rocks, in an imposing mass, 
rose before us, a heap of gigantic blocks, an enormous 
steep granite shore, forming dark grottos, but which pre- 
sented no practicable slope: it was the prop of the Island 
of Crespo. It was the earth! Captain Nemo stopped 
suddenly. A gesture of his brought us all to a halt; and 
however desirous I might be to scale the wall, I was obliged 
to stop. Here ended Captain Nemo's domains, and he 
would not go beyond them. Further on was a portion of 
the globe he might not trample upon. 

The return began. Captain Nemo had returned to the 
head of his little band, directing their course without hesi- 
tation. I thought we were not following the same road to 
return to the Nautilus. The new road was very steep, 
and consequently very painful. We approached the sur- 



20,000 LEAGUES UlS-DER THE SEAS. 9 

face of the sea rapidly, but this return to the upper strata 
was not so sudden as to cause relief from the pressure too 
rapidly, which might have produced serious disorder in 
our organization, and brought on internal lesions, so fatal 
to divers. Very soon light reappeared and grew, and the 
sun being low on the horizon, the refraction edged the 
different objects with a spectral ring. At ten yards and 
a half deep we walked amidst a shoal of little fishes of all 
kinds, more numerous than the birds of the air, and ulso 
more agile; but no aquatic game worthy of a shot had as 
yet met our gaze, when at that moment I saw the captain 
shoulder his gun quickly, and follow a moving object into 
the shrubs. He fired I heard a slight hissing, and a 
creature fell stunned at some distance from us. It was a 
magnificent sea-otter, an enhydrus, the only exclusively 
marine quadruped. This otter was five feet long, and 
must have been very valuable. Its skin, chestnut-brown 
above and silvery underneath, would have made ono of 
those beautiful furs so sought after in the Eussian rncl 
Chinese markets; the fineness and the luster of its coat 
would certainly fetch 80. I admired this curious mammal, 
with its rounded head ornamented with short ears, its 
round eyes, and white whiskers like those of a cat, with 
webbed feet and nails, and tufted tail. This precious 
animal, hunted and tracked by fishermen, has now become 
rery rare, and taken refuge chiefly in the northern parts 
of the Pacific, or probably its race v, r ould soon become ex* 
tinct. 

Captain Nemo's companion took the beast, threw it 
over his shoulder, and we continued on our journey. For 
an hour a plain of sand lay stretched before us. Some- 
times it rose to within two yards and some inches of 
the surface of the water. I then saw our image clearly 
reflected, drawn inversely, anJ above us-appeared an iden- 
tical group reflecting our movements and our actions; in 
a word, like us in every point, except that they walked 
with their heads downward and their feet in the air. 

Another effect noticed, which was the passage of thick 
clouds which formed and vanished rapidly; but on reflec- 
tion I understood that these seeming clouds were due to 
the varying thickness of the reeds at the bottom, and I 
could even see the fleecy foam which their broken tops 
multiplied on the water, and the shadows of large bir4s 



90 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

passing above our heads, whose rapid flight I could dis- 
cern on the surface of the sea. 

On this occasion I was witness to one of the finest gun- 
shots that ever made the nerves of a hunter thrill. A large 
bird, of great breadth of wing, clearly visible, approached, 
hovering over us. Captain Nemo's companion shouldered 
his gun and fired, when it was only a few yards above the 
waves. The creature fell stunned, and the force of its 
fall brought it within reach of the dexterous hunter's 
grasp. It was an albatross of the finest kind. 

Our march had not been interrupted by this incident. 
For two hours we followed these sandy plains, then fields of 
algse very disagreeable to cross. Candidly, I could do no 
more when I saw a glimmer of light, which for a half- 
mile broke the darkness of the waters. It was the lantern 
of the Nautilus. Before twenty minutes were over we 
should be on board, and I should be able to' breathe with 
ease; for it seemed that my reservoir supplied air very 
deficient in oxygen. But I did not reckon on an acci- 
dental meeting, which delayed our arrival for some time. 

I had remained some steps behind, when I presently 
saw Captain Nemo coming hurriedly toward me. With 
his strong hand he bent me to the ground, his companion 
doing the same to Conseil. At first I knew not what to 
think of this sudden attack, but I was soon reassured by 
seeing the captain lie down beside me, and remain im- 
movable. 

I was stretched on the ground, just under shelter of a 
bush of algae, when, rising my head, I saw some enor- 
mous mass, casting phosphorescent gleams, pass bluster- 
ingly by. 

My blood froze in my veins as I recognized two formid- 
able sharks which threatened us. It was a couple of 
tintoreas, terrible creatures, with enormous tails and a 
dull glassy stare, the phosphorescent matter ejected from 
holes pierced around the muzzle. Monstrous brutes! 
which would crush a whole man in their iron jaws. I did 
not know whether Conseil stopped to classify them; for 
my part, I noticed their silver bellies, and their huge 
mouths bristling with teeth, from a very unscientific point 
of view, and more as a possible victim than as a natur- 
alist. 

Happily the voracious creatures do not see well. They 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 91 

passed without seeing us, brushing us with their brownish 
fins, and we escaped by a miracle from a danger certainly 
greater than meeting a tiger full-face in the forest. Half 
an hour after, guided by the electric light, we reached the 
Nautilus. The outside door had been left open, and Cap- 
tain Nemo closed it as soon as we had entered the first 
cell. He then pressed a knob. I heard the pumps work- 
ing in the midst of the vessel, I felt the water sinking 
from around me, and in a few moments the cell was entire- 
ly empty. The inside door then opened, and we entered 
the vestry. 

There our diving-dress was taken off, not without some 
trouble; and, fairly worn out from want of food and sleep, 
I returned to my room, in great wonder at this surprising 
excursion at the bottom of the sea. 



