CHAPTER IV. 

THE RED SEA. 

IN the course of the day of the 29th of January, the 
Island of Ceylon disappeared under the horizon, and the 
Nautilus, at a speed of twenty miles an hour, slid into the 
labyrinth of canals which separate the Maldives from the 
Laccadives. It coasted even the Island of Kiltan, a land 
originally madreporic, discovered by Vasco de Gama in 
1499, and one of the nineteen principal islands of the Lac- 
cadi ve Archipelago situated between 10 and 14 30' north 
latitude, and 69" 50' 72, east longitude. 

We had made 16,220 miles, or 7,500 (French) leagues 
from our starting-point in the Japanese Seas. 

The next day (30th January), when the Nautilus went 



158 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

to the surface of the ocean, there was no land in sight. 
Its course was N.N.E., in the direction of the Sea of 
Oman, between Arabia and the Indian Peninsula, which 
serves as an outlet to the Persian Gulf. It was evidently a 
block without any possible egress. Where was Captain 
Nemo taking us to? I could not say. This, however, did 
not satisfy the Canadian, who that day came to me asking 
where we were going. 

" We are going where our Captain's fancy takes us, 
Master Ned." 

" His fancy cannot take us far, then/'' said the Canadian. 
" The Persian Gulf has no outlet; and if we do go in, it- 
will not be long before we are out again." 

" Very well, then, we will come out again, Master Land; 
and if after the Persian Gulf the Nautilus would like to 
visit the Red Sea, the Straits of Bab-el-mandeb are there 
to give us entrance." 

"I need not tell you, sir," said Ned Land, "that the 
Red Sea is as much closed as the Gulf, as the Isthmus of 
Suez is not yet cut; and if it was, a boat as mysterious as 
ours would not risk itself in a canal cut with sluices. And 
again, the Red Sea is not the road to take us back to 
Europe." 

" But I never said we were going back to Europe." 

" What do you suppose, then?" 

" I suppose that, after visiting the curious coasts of 
Arabia and Egypt, the Nautilus will go down the Indian 
Ocean again, perhaps cross the Channel of Mozambique, 
perhaps off the Mascarenhas, so as to gain the Cape of 
Good Hope." 

" And once at the Cape of Good Hope?" asked the 
Canadian, with peculiar emphasis. 

" Well, we shall penetrate into that Atlantic which we 
do not yet know! Ah! friend Ned, you are getting tired 
of this journey under the sea; you are surfeited with the 
incessantly varying spectacle of submarine wonders. For 
my part I shall be sorry to see the end of a voyage which 
it is given to so few men to make." 

For four days, till the end of February, the Nautilus 
scoured the Sea of Oman, at various speeds and at various 
depths. It seemed to go at random, as if hesitating as to 
which road it should follow, but we never passed tha 
Tropic of Cancer. 



20,000 LEAGUES CINDER THE SEAS. 159 

In quitting this sea we sighted Muscat for an instant, 
one of the most important towns of the country of Oman. 
I admired its strange aspect, surrounded by black rocks 
upon which its white houses and forts stood in relief. 1 
saw the rounded domes of its mosques, the elegant points 
of its minarets, its fresh and verdant terraces. But it 
vas only a vision! the Nautilus soon sank under the waves 
of that part of the sea. 

We passed along the Arabian coast of Mahrah and Had- 
ramaut, for a distance of six miles, its undulating line of 
mountains being occasionally relieved by some ancient 
ruin. The 5th of February we at last entered the Gulf of 
Aden, a perfect funnel introduced into the neck of Bab- 
el-mandeb, through which the Indian waters entered the 
Red Sea. 

The 6th of February, the Nautilus floated in sight of 
Aden, perched upon a promontory which a narrow isthmus 
joins to the mainland, a kind of inaccessible Gibraltar, 
the fortifications of which were_ rebuilt by the English 
after taking possession in 1837. I caught a glimpse of the 
octagon minarets of this town, which was at one time, 
according to the historian, Edrisi, the richest commercial 
magazine on the coast 

I certainly thought that Captain Nemo, arrived at this 
point, would back out again; but I was mistaken, for he 
did no such thing, much to my surprise. 

The next day, the 7th of February, we entered the 
Straits of Bab-el-mandeb, the name of which in the Arab 
tongue, means "the gate of tears." 

To twenty miles in breadth, it is only thirty-two in 
Jength. And for the Nautilus, starting at full speed, the 
crossing was scarcely the work of an hour. But I saw not 
even the island of JPerim, with which the British govern- 
ment hus fortified the position of Aden. There were too 
many English or French steamers of the line of Suez to 
Bombay, Calcutta to Melbourne, and from Bourbon to the 
Mauritius, furrowing this narrow passage for the Nautilus 
to venture to show itself. So it remained prudently be- 
}ow. At last, about noon, we were in the waters of the 
Red Sea. 

I would not even seek to understand the caprice which 
had decided Captain Nemo upon entering the gulf. But 
I quite approved of the Nautilus entering it. Its speed 



160 20,000 LEAGUES UNDEll THE SEAS. 

was lessened; sometimes it kept on the surface, sometimes 
it dived to avoid a vessel, and thus I was able to observe 
the upper and lower parts of this curious sea. 

The 7th of February, from the first dawn of day, Mocha 
came in sight, now a ruined town, whose walls would fall 
at a gunshot, yet which shelters here and there some ver- 
dant date-trees; once an important city,, containing six 
public markets, and twenty-six mosques, and whose walls, 
defended by fourteen forts, formed a girdle of two miles 
in circumference. 

The Nautilus then approached the African shore, where 
the depth of the sea was greater. There, between two 
waters clear as crystal, through the open panels we were 
allowed to contemplate the beautiful' bushes of brilliant 
coral, and large blocks of rock -clothed with a splendid fur 
of green algae and fuci. What an indescribable spectacle, 
and what variety of sights and landscapes, along these 
sand-banks and volcanic islands which bound the Libyan 
coast? But where these shrubs appeared in all their 
beauty is on the eastern coast, which the Nautilus soon 
gained. It was on the coast of Tehama, for there not only 
did this display of zoophytes nourish beneath the level of 
the sea, but they also formed picturesque interlacing^ 
which unfolded themselves about sixty feet above the sur- 
face, more capricious but less highly colored than those 
whose freshness was kept up by the vital power of the 
waters. 

What charming hours I passed thus at the window oi' 
the saloon! What new specimens of submarine flora and 
fauna did I admire under the brightness of our electric 
lantern! 

There grew sponges of all shapes, pediculated, foliated, 
globular, and digital. They certainly justified the names 
of baskets, cups, distaffs, elk's-horns, lion's-feet, peacockV 
tails, and Neptune's-gloves, which have been given to them 
by the fishermen, greater poets than the savants. 

Other zoophytes which multiply near the sponges consist 
principally of medusae of a most elegant kind. The 
molluscs were represented by varieties of the calmar (which, 
according to Orbigny, are peculiar to the Red Sea): and 
reptiles by the visgata turtle, of the genus of cheloniae, 
which furnished a wholesome and delicate food for our 
table. 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. Kl 

As to the fish, they were abundant, and often remarka- 
ble. The following are those which the nets of the Nau- 
tilus brought more frequently on board: 

Eays of red-brick color, with bodies marked with blue 
Bpots, and easily recognizable by their double spikes; some 
superb caranxes, marked with seven transverse bands of 
jet-black, blue and yellow fins, and gold and silrer scales; 
mullets with yellow heads; gobies, and a thousand other 
species, common to the ocean, which we had just trav- 
ersed. 

The 9th of February, the Nautilus floated in the broad- 
est part of the Red Sea, which is comprised between 
Souakin on the west coast, and Koomfidah, on the east 
coast, with a diameter of ninety miles. 

That day at noon, after the bearings were taken, Cap- 
tain Nemo mounted the platform, where I happened to 
be, and I was determined not to let him go down aguin 
without at least pressing him regarding his ulterior 
projects. As soon as he saw me he approached, and gra- 
ciously offered me a cigar. 

" Well, sir. does this Eed Sea please you? Have you 
sufficiently observed the wonders it covers, its fishes, its 
zoophytes, its parterres of sponges, and its forests of coral? 
Did you catcli a glimpse of the towns on its borders?" 

" Yes, Captain Nemo," I replied; " and the Nautilus is 
wonderfully fitted for such a study. Ah! it is an intelli- 
gent boat!" 

" Yes, sir, intelligent and invulnerable. It fears neither 
the terrible tempests of the Red Sea, nor its currents, nor 
its sand-banks." 

" Certainly," said I, " this sea is quoted as one of the 
worst, and in the time of the ancients, if I am not mis- 
taken, its reputation was detestable." 

" Detestable, M. Aronnax. The Greek and Latin his- 
torians do not speak favorably of it, and Strabo says it is 
very dangerous during the Etesian winds, and in the rainy 
seasons. The Arabian Edrisi portrays it under the name 
of the Gulf of Colzoum, and relates that vessels perished 
there in great numbers on the sand-banks, and that no 
one would risk sailing in the night. It is, he pretends, a 
sea subject to fearful hurricanes, strewn with inhospitable 
islands, and, 'which offers nothing good either on its 



1G2 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

surface or in its depths.' Sue]), too, is the opinion of 
Arrian, Agatharcides, and Artemidorus." 

" One may see," I replied, " that these historians never 
sailed on board the Nautilus." 

"Just so," replied the captain, smiling, "and in that 
respect moderns are not more advanced than the ancients. 
It required many ages to find out the mechanical power of 
steam. Who knows if, in another hundred years, we may 
not see a second Nautilus? Progress is slow, M. Aronnax." 

" It is true," I answered; "your boat is at least a cent- 
ury before its time, perhaps an era. What a misfortune 
that the secret of such an invention should die with its 
inventor!" 

Captain Nemo did not reply. After some minutes' 
silence he continued: 

" You were speaking of the opinions of ancient histo- 
rians upon the dangerous navigation of the Red Sea." 

" It is true," said I; "but were not their fears exag- 
gerated?" 

" Tes and no, M. Aronnax," replied Captain Nemo, 
who seemed to know the Red Sea by heart. " That which 
is no longer dangerous for a modern vessel, well rigged, 
strongly built, and master of its own course, thanks to 
obedient steam, offered all sorts of perils to the ships of 
the ancients. Picture to yourself those first navigators 
venturing in ships made of planks sewn with the cords of 
the palm-tree, saturated with the grease of the sea-dog, and 
covered with powdered resin! They had not even instru- 
ments wherewith to take their bearings, and they went by 
guess amongst currents of which they scarcely knew 
anything, under such conditions shipwrecks were, and 
must have been, numerous. But in our time, steamers 
running between Suez and the South Seas have nothing 
more to fear from the fury of this gulf, in spite of contrary 
trade-winds. The captain and passengers do not prepare 
for their departure by offering propitiatory sacrifices; and, 
on their return, they no longer go ornamented with wreaths 
and gilt fillets to thank the gods in the neighboring 
temple." 

" I agree with you," said I; " and steam seems to have 
killed all gratitude in the hearts of sailors. But, Captain, 
since you seem to have especially studied this sea, can you 
tell me the origin of its name?" 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 163 

" There exist several explanations on the subject, M. 
Aronnax. "Would you like to know the opinion of a 
chronicler of the fourteenth century?" 

"Willingly." 

" This fanciful writer pretends that its name was given 
to it after the passage of the Israelites, when Pharoah 
perished in the waves which closed at the voice of Moses." 

"A poet's explanation, Captain Nemo," I replied; "but 
I cannot content myself with that. I ask you for your 
personal opinion." 

" Here it is, M. Aronnax. According to my idea we 
must see in this appellation of the Eed Sea a translation 
of the Hebrew word * Edom;' and if the ancients gave it 
that name, it was on account of the particular color of its 
waters." 

" But up to this time I have seen nothing but trans- 
parent waves, and without any particular color." 

"Very likely; but as we advance to the bottom of the 
gulf, you will see this singular appearance. I remember 
seeing the Bay of Tor entirely red, like a sea of blood." 

" And you attribute this color to the presence of a 
microscopic sea- weed?" 

" Yes; it is a mucilaginous purple matter, produced by 
the restless little plants known by the name of trichodes- 
ima, and of which it requires 40,000 to occupy the space 
of a square .04 of an inch. Perhaps we shall meet some 
when we go to Tor." 

"So, Captain Nemo, it is not the first time you have 
overrun the Red Sea on board the Nautilus?" 

"No, sir." 

" As you spoke a while ago of the passage of the Israel- 
ites, and of the catastrophe of the Egyptians, I will ask 
whether you have met with traces under the water of this 
great historical fact?" 

" No, sir; and for a very good reason." 

"What is it?" 

" It is that the spot where Moses and his people passed 
is now so blocked up with sand that the camels can barely 
bathe their legs there. You can well understand that 
there would not be water enough for my Nautilus." 

" And the spot?" I asked. 

" The spot is situated a little above the Isthmus of Suez, 
in the arm which formerly made a deep estuary, when the 



164 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

Red Sea extended to the Salt Lakes. Now, whether this 
passage were miraculous or not, the Israelites, neverthe- 
less, crossed there to reach the Promised Land, and Pha- 
raoh's army perished precisely on that spot; and I think- 
that excavations made in the middle of the sand would 
bring to light a large number of arms and instruments of 
Egyptian origin." 

"That is evident," I replied; "and for the sake of 
archaeologists let us hope that these excavations will be 
made sooner or later, when new towns are established on 
the isthmus, after the construction of the Suez Canal; a 
canal, however, very useless to a vessel like the Nautilus." 

" Very likely; but useful to the whole world," said Cap- 
tain Nemo. "The ancients well understood the utility of 
a communication between the Red Sea and the Mediter- 
ranean for their commercial affairs; but they did not think 
of digging a canal direct, and took the Nile as an inter- 
mediate. Very probably the canal which united the Nile 
to the Red Sea was begun by Sesostris, if we may believe 
tradition. One thing is certain, that in the year 615 before 
Jesus Christ, Necos undertook the works of an alimentary 
canal to the waters of the Nile, across the plain of Egypt, 
looking toward Arabia. It took four days to go up this 
canal, and it was so wide that two triremes could go abreast. 
It was carried on by Darius, the son of Hystaspes, and 
probably finished by Ptolemy II. Strabosaw it navigated; 
but its decline from the point of departure, near Bubastes, 
to the Red Sea was so slight, that it was only navigable 
for a few months in the year. This canal answered ail 
commercial purposes to the age of Antoninus, when it was 
abandoned and blocked up with sand. Restored by order 
of the Caliph Omar, it was definitely destroyed in 761 or 
762 by Caliph Al-Mansor, who wished to prevent the ar- 
rival of provisions to Mohammed-ben- Abdallah, who had 
revolted against him. During the expedition into Egypt 
your General Bonaparte discovered traces of the works in 
the Desert of Suez; and, surprised by the tide, he nearly 
perished before regaining Hadjaroth, at the very place 
where Moses had encamped three thousand years before 
him." 

" Well, Captain, what the ancients dared not undertake, 
this junction between the two seas, which will shorten the 
road from Cadiz to India, M. Lesseps has succeeded in 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 165 

doing; and before long he will have changed Africa into 
an immense island." 

"Yes, M. Aronnax; you have the right to be proud of 
your countryman. Such a man brings more honor to a 
nation than great captains. He began, like so many others, 
with disgust and rebuffs: but he has triumphed, for he has 
the genius of will. And it is sad to think that a work like 
that, which ought to have b.een an international work, and 
which would have sufficed to make a reign illustrious 
should have succeeded by the energy of one man. All 
honor to M. Lesseps." 

"Yes, honor to the great citizen!" I replied, sur- 
prised by the manner in which Captain Nemo had just 
spoken. 

"Unfortunately," he continued, "I cannot take you 
through the Suez Canal; but you will be able to see the 
long jetty of Port Said after to-morrow, when we shall be 
in the Mediterranean." 

"The Mediterranean!" I exclaimed. 

"Yes, sir; does that astonish you?" 

" What astonishes me is to think that we shall be there 
the day after to-morrow." 

"Indeed?" 

" Yes, Captain, although by this time I ought to have 
accustomed myself to be surprised at nothing since I- have 
been on board your boat." 

"But the cause of this surprise?" 

" Well! it is the fearful speed you will have to put on 
the Nautilus, if the day after to-morrow she is to be in the 
Mediterranean, having made the round of Africa, and 
doubled the Cape of Good Hope?" 

"Who told you that she would make the round of 
Africa, and double the Cope of Good Hope, sir?" 

"Well, unless the Nautilus sails on dry land, and passes 
above the isthmus " 

" Or beneath it, M. Aronnax." 

" Beneath it?" 

" Certainly," replied Captain Nemo, quietly. " A long 
time ago nature made under this tongue of land what man 
has this day made on its surface." 

" What! such a passage, exists?" 

"Yes; a subterranean passage, which I have named the 



166 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

Arabian Tunnel. It takes us beneath Suez, and opens 
into the Gulf of Pelusium." 

"But this isthmus is composed of nothing but quick- 
sands." 

" To a certain depth. But at fifty -five yards only, there 
is a solid layer of rock." 

"Did you discover this passage by chance?" I asked, 
more and more surprised. 

"Chance and reasoning, sir; and by reasoning even 
more than by chance. Not only does this passage exist, 
but I have profited by it several times. Without that I 
should not have ventured this day into the impassable Red 
Sea. I noticed that in the Red Sea and in the Mediter- 
ranean thtM-e existed a certain number of fishes of a kind 
perfectly identical ophidia, flatoles, girelles, and exocosti. 
Certain of that fact, I asked myself Was it possible that 
there was no communication between the two seas? If 
there was the subterranean current must necessarily run 
from the Red Sea to the Mediterranean, from &lt;the sole 
cause of difference of level. I caught a large number of 
fishes in the neighborhood of Suez. I passed a copper 
ring through their tails, and threw them back into the sea. 
Some months later, on the coast of Syria, I caught some 
of my fish ornamented with the ring. Thus the commu- 
nication between the two was proved. I then sought for 
it with my Nautilus; I discovered it, ventured into it, and 
before long, sir, you too will have passed through my 
Arabian Tunnel!" 



