CHAPTER II. 

PRO AND CON. 

AT the period when these events took place, I had just 
returned from a scientific research in the disagreeable Ter- 
ritory of Nebraska, in the United States. In virtue of my 
office as Assistant Professor in the Museum of Natural 
History in Paris, the French government had attached me 
to that expedition. After six months in Nebraska, I 
arrived in New York toward the end of March, laden with 
a precious collection. My departure for France was fixed 
for the first days in May. Meantime, I was occupying my- 
self in classifying my rnineralogical, botanical, and zoology 
ical riches, when the accident happened to the Scotia, 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDEB THE SIAS, ^ 

I was perfectly up in the subject which wns the question 
of the day. How could I be otherwise? I had read and 
re-read all the American and European papers without be- 
ing any nearer a conclusion. This mystery puzzled me. 
Under the impossibility of forming an opinion, I jumped 
from one extreme to the other. That there really was 
something could not be doubted, and the incredulous were 
invited to put their finger on the wound of the Scotia. 

On ruy arrival in New York, the question was at its 
height. The hypothesis of the floating island, and the 
unapproachable sand-bank, supported by minds little com- 
petent to form a judgment, was abandoned. And, indeed, 
unless this shoal had a machine in its stomach, how could 
it change its position with such astonishing rapidity? 
. From the same cause, the idea of a floating hull of an 
enormous wreck was given up. 

There remained then only two possible solutions of the 
question, which created two distinct parties: on one side, 
those who were for a monster of colossal strength; on the 
other, those who were for a submarine vessel of enormous 
motive power. 

But this last hypothesis, plausible as it was, could not 
stand against inquiries made in both worlds. That a 
private gentleman should have such a machine at his com- 
mand was not likely. Where, when, and how was it built? 
and how could its construction have been kept secret? 
Certainly a government might possess such a destructive 
machine. And in these disastrous times, when the inge- 
nuity of man has multiplied the power of weapons of war, 
it was possible that, without the knowledge of others, a 
state might try to work such a formidable engine. After 
the chassepots came the torpedoes, after the torpedoes the 
submarine rams, then the reaction. At least, I hope so. 

But the hypothesis of a war- machine fell before the 
declaration of governments. As public interest was in 
question, and transatlantic communications suffered, their 
veracity could not be doubted. But, how admit that the 
construction of this submarine boat had escaped the public 
eye? For a private gentleman to keep the secret under 
such circumstances would be very difficult, and for a state 
whose every act is persistently watched by powerful rivals, 
certainly impossible. 

After inquiries made in England, France, Russia, 



10 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

sia, Spain, Italy, and America, even in Turkey, the hy- 
pothesis of a submarine monitor was definitely rejected. 

Upon my arrival in New York several persons did me 
the honor of consulting me on the phenomenon in ques- 
tion. I had published in France a work in quarto, in two 
volumes, entitled, "Mysteries of the Great Submarine 
Grounds." This book, highly approved of in the learned 
world, gained for me a special reputation in this rather 
obscure branch of Natural History. My advice was asked. 
As long as I could deny the reality of the fact, I confined 
myself to a decided negative. But soon finding myself 
driven into a corner, I was obliged to explain myself cate- 
gorically. And even " the Honorable Pierre Aronnax, 
Professor in the Museum of Paris," was called upon by 
the New York Herald to express a definite opinion of 
some sort. I did something. I spoke from want of power 
to hold my tongue. I discussed the question in all its 
forms, politically and scientifically; and I give here an 
extract from a carefully studied article which I published 
in the number of the 30th of April. It ran as follows: 

" After examining one by one the different hypotheses, 
rejecting all other suggestions, it becomes necessary to ad- 
mit the existence of a marine animal of enormous power. 

" The great depths of the ocean are entirely unknown 
to us. Soundings cannot reach them. What passes in 
those remote depths what beings live, or can live, twelve 
or fifteen miles beneath the surface of the waters what 
is the organization of these animals we can scarcely con- 
jecture. However, the solution of the problem submitted 
to me may modify the form of the dilemma. Either we 
do know all the varieties of beings which people our planet, 
or we do not. If we do not know them all, if Nature has 
still secrets in ichthyology for us, nothing is more con- 
formable to reason than to admit the existence of fishes, 
or cetaceans of other kinds, or even of new species, of an 
organization formed to inhabit the strata inaccessible to 
soundings, and which an accident of some sort, either 
fantastical or capricious, has brought at long intervals to 
the upper level of the ocean. 

"If, on the contrary, we do know all living kinds, we 
must necessarily seek for the animal in question among 
those marine beings already classed; and, in that case, I 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 11 

should be disposed to admit the existence of a gigantic 
narwhal. 

"The common narwhal, or unicorn of the sea, often 
attains a length of sixty feet. Increase its size fivefold or 
tenfold, give it strength proportionate to its size, lengthen 
its destructive weapons, and you obtain the animal re- 
quired. It will have the proportions determined by the 
officers of the Shannon, the instrument required by the 
perforation of the Scotia, and the power necessary to 
pierce the hull of the steamer. 

"Indeed the narwhal is armed with a sort of ivory 
sword, a halberd, according to the expression of certain 
naturalists. The principal tusk has the hardness of steel. 
Some of these tusks have been found buried in the bodies 
of whales, which the unicorn always attacks with success. 
Others have been drawn out not without trouble, from 
the bottoms of ships, which they had pierced through and 
through, as a gimlet pierces a barrel. The Museum of the 
Faculty of Medicine of Paris possesses one of these defen- 
sive weapons, two yards and a quarter in length, and 
fifteen inches in diameter at the base. 

"Very well! suppose this weapon to be six times stronger, 
and the animal ten times more powerful; launch it at the 
rate of twenty miles an hour, and you obtain a shock 
capable of producing the catastrophe required. Until 
further information, therefore, I shall maintain it to be a 
sea-unicorn of colossal dimensions, armed, not with a 
halberd, but with a real spur, as the armored frigates, or 
the " rams " of war, whose massiveness and motive power 
it would possess at the same time. Thus may this in- 
explicable phenomenon be explained, unless there be 
something over and above all that one has ever conjectured, 
seen, perceived or experienced; which is just within the 
bounds of possibility." 

These last words were cowardly on my part; but, up to 
a certain point, I wished to shelter my dignity as Professor, 
and not give too much cause for laughter to the Americans, 
who laugh well when they do laugh. I reserved for my- 
self a way of escape. In effect, however, I admitted the 
existence of the "monster." My article was warmly dis- 
cussed, which procured it a high reputation. It rallied 
around it a certain number of partisans. The solution it 
r- " 



13 20,000 LEAGTT-ES TKDER TTTE SEA.S. 

proposed gave, at least, full liberty to the imagination. 
The human mind delights in grand conceptions of super- 
natural beings. And the sea is precisely their best 
vehicle, the only medium through which these giants 
(against which terrestrial animals, such as elephants or 
rhinoceroses, areas nothing) can be produced or developed. 

The industrial and commercial papers treated the ques- 
ti.'ti chiefly from this point of view. The Shipping and 
Mi mint He Gazette, the Lloyds' List, the Packet-Boat, and 
thf Maritime and Colonial Review, all papers devoted to 
insurance companies which threatened to raise their rates 
of premium, were unanimous on this point. Public opin- 
ion had been pronounced. The United States were the 
first in the field; and in New York they made prepara- 
tions for an expedition destined to pursue this narwhal. 
A frigate of great speed, the Abraham Lincoln, was put 
in commission as soon as possible. The arsenals were 
opened to Commander Farragut, who hastened the arming 
of his frigate; but, as ic always happens, the moment it 
was decided to pursue the monster, the monster did not 
appear. For two months no one heard it spoken of. No 
ships met with it. It seemed as if this unicorn knew of 
the plots weaving around it. It had been so much talked 
of, even through the Atlantic cable, that jesters pretended 
that this slender fly had stopped a telegram on its pas- 
sage, and was making the most of it. 

So when the frigate had been armed for a long cam- 
paign, and provided with formidable fishing apparatus, 
no one could tell what course to pursue. Impatience 
grew apace, when, on the 2d of June, they learned that* a 
steamer of the line of San Francisco, from California to 
Shanghai, had seen the animal three weeks before in the 
North Pacific Ocean. The excitement caused by this 
news was extreme. The ship was revictualed and well 
stocked with coal. 

Three hours before the Abraham Lincoln left Brooklyn 
pier, I received a letter worded as follows: 

"To M. ARONNAX, Professor in the Museum of Paris, 
' FIFTH AVENUE HOTEL, NEW YORK, 

" SIR, If you will consent to join the Abraham Lin- 
coln in this expedition, the government of the United 
States will with pleasure see France represented in the 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 13 

enterprise. Commander Farragnt has a cabin at your dis- 
posal. Very cordially yours, 

" J. B. HOBSON, Secretary of Marine." 



