CHAPTER XI. 

THE SARGASSO SEA. 

THAT day the Nautilus crossed a singular [part of the 
Atlantic Ocean. No one can be ignorant of the existence 
of a current of warm water, known by the name of the 
Gulf Stream. After leaving the Gulf of Mexico, about 
the twenty -fifth degree of north latitude, this current di- 
vides into two arms, the principle one going toward the 
coast of Ireland and Norway, whilst the second bends to 
the south about the height of the Azores; then, touching 
the African shore, and describing a lengthened oval, re- 
turns to the Antilles. This second arm it is rather a 
collar than an arm surrounds with its circle of warm 
water that portion of the cold, quiet, immovable ocean 
called the Sargasso Sea, a perfect lake in the open Atlan- 
tic; it takes no less than three years for the great current 
to pass around it. Such was the region the Nautilus was 
now visiting, a perfect meadow, a close carpet of sea- weed, 
fucus, and tropical berries, so thick and so compact that 
the stem of a vessel could hardly tear its way through it. 
And Captain Nemo, not wishing to entangle his screw in 
this herbaceous mass, kept some yards beneath the surface 
of the waves. The name Sargasso comes from the Spanish 
word " sargazzo," which signifies kelp. This kelp or 
varech, or berry-plant, is the principle formation of this 
immense bank. And this is the reason, according to the 
learned Maury, the author of "The Physical Geography 
of the Globe," why these hydrophites unite in the peace- 
ful basin of the Atlantic: The only explanation which 
can be given, he says, seems to me to result from the ex- 
perience known to all the world. Place in a vase some 
fragments of cork or other floating body, and give to tho 
water in the vase a circular movement, the scattered f ra# 



.210 20,000 LEAGTJES UNDER THE SEAS. 

ments will unite in a group in the center of the liquid 
surface, that is to say, in the part less agitated. In the 
phenomenon we are considering, the Atlantic is the vase, 
the Gulf Stream the circular current, and the Sargasso 
Sea the central point at which the flouting bodies unite. 

I share Maury's opinion, and I was able to study the 
phenomenon in the very midst, where vessels rarely pene- 
trate. Above us floated products of all kinds, heaped up 
among these brownish plants; trunks of trees torn from 
the Andes or the Rocky Mountains, and floated by the 
Amazon or the Mississippi; numerous wrecks, remains of 
keels, or ships' bottoms, side planks stove in, and so 
weighted with shells and barnacles that they could not 
again rise to the surface. And time will one day justify 
Maury's other opinion, that these substances thus accum- 
ulated for ages will become petrified by the action of the 
water, and will then form inexhaustible coal mines a 
precious reserve prepared by far-seeing nature for the 
moment when men shall have exhausted the mines of con- 
tinents. 

In the midst of this inextricable mass of plants and sea- 
weed, I noticed some charming pink halcyons and actiniae, 
with their long tentacles trailing after them; medusae, 
green, red, and blue, and the great rhyostoms of Cuvier, 
the large umbrella of which was bordered and festooned 
with violet. 

All the day of the 22d of February we passed in the 
Sargasso Sea, where such fish as are partial to marine 
plants and fuci find abundant nourishment. The next, 
the ocean had returned to its accustomed aspect. From 
this time for nineteen days, from the 23d of February to 
the 12th of March, the Nautilus kept in the middle of 
the Atlantic, carrying us at a constant speed of a hundred 
leagues in twenty-four hours. Captain Nemo evidently 
intended accomplishing his submarine programme, and I 
imagined that he intended, after doubling Cape Horn, to 
return to the Australian seas of the Pacific. Ned Land 
had cause for fear. In these large seas, void of islands, 
we could not attempt to leave the boat. Nor had we any 
means of opposing Captajn Nemo's will. Our only course 
was to submit; but what we could neither gain by force 
nor cunning, I liked to think might be obtained by per- 
suasion. This voyage ended, would he not consent to 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 21J 

restore our liberty, under an oath never to reveal his exist- 
ence? an oath of honor which we should have religiously 
kept. But we must consider that delicate question with 
the captain. But Avas I free to claim this liberty. Had 
he not himself said from the beginning, in the firmest 
manner, that the secret of his life exacted from him our 
lasting imprisonment onboard the Nautilus? And would 
not my four months' silence appear to him a tacit accept- 
ance of our situation? And would not a return to the 
subject result in raising suspicions which might be hurtful 
to our projects if at some future time a favorable oppor- 
tunity offered to return to them? 

During the nineteen days mentioned above, no incident 
of any note happened to signalize our voyage. I saw little 
of the captain: he was at work. In the library I often 
found his books left open, especially those on "Natural 
History. My work on submarine depths, conned over by 
him, was covered with marginal notes, often contradicting 
my theories and systems; but the captain contented him- 
self with thus purging my work; it was very rare for him 
to discuss it with me. Sometimes I heard the melancholy 
tone of his organ; but only at night, in the midst of the 
deepest obscurity, when the Nautilus slept upon the de- 
serted ocean. During this part of our voyage we sailed 
whole days on the surface of the waves. The sea seemed 
abandoned. A few sailing-vessels, on the road to India, 
were making for the Cape of Good Hope. One day we 
were followed by the boats of a whaler, who, no doubt, 
took us for some enormous whale of great price; but Cap- 
tain Nemo did not wish the worthy fellows to lose their 
time and trouble, so ended the chase by plunging under 
the water. Our navigation continued until the 13th oi 
March; that day the Nautilus was employed in taking 
soundings, which greatly interested me. We had then 
made about 13,000 leagues since our departure from the 
high seas of the Pacific. The bearings gave us 45 37' 
south latitude, and 37 53' west longitude. It was the 
same water in which Captain Denham of the Herald 
sounded 7,000 fathoms without finding the bottom. -There, 
too, Lieutenant Parker, of the American frigate Congress, 
could not touch the bottom with 15,140 yards. Captain 
Nemo intended seeking the bottom of the ocean by a diagonal 
sufficiently lengthened by means of lateral planes placed 



213 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

at an angle of forty-five degrees with the water-line of the 
Nautilus. Then the screw set to work at its maximum 
speed, its four blades beating the waves with indescribable 
force. Under this powerful pressure the hull of the Nau- 
tilus quivered like a sonorous chord, and sank regularly 
under the water. 

At 7,000 fathoms I saw some blackish tops rising from 
the midst of the waters; but these summits might belong 
to high mountains like the Himalayas or Mount Blanc, 
even higher; and the depth of the abyss remained incal- 
culable. The Nautilus descended still lower, in spite of 
the great pressure. I felt the steel plates tremble at the 
fastenings of the bolts: its bars bent; its partitions groan- 
ed; the windows of the saloon seemed to curve under the 
pressure of the waters. And this firm structure would 
doubtless have yielded, if, as its captain had said, it had 
not been capable of resistance like a solid block. In skirt- 
ing the declivity of these rocks, lost under the water, I 
still saw some shells, some surpulse and spinorbes, still 
living, and some specimens of asteriads. But soon this 
last representative of animal life disappeared, and at the 
depth of more than three leagues, the Nautilus had passed 
the limits of submarine existence, even as a balloon does 
when it rises above the respirable atmosphere. We had 
attained a depth of 16,000 yards (four leagues), and the 
sides of the Nautilus then bore a pressure of 1,600 atmos- 
pheres, that is to say, 3,200 pounds to each square two- 
fifths of an inch of its surface. 

" What a situation to be in!" I exclaimed. " To over- 
run these deep regions where man has never trod. Look, 
Captain, look at these magnificent rocks, these uninhab- 
ited grottoes, these lowest receptacles of the globe, where 
life is no longer possible! What unknown sights are here! 
Whv should we be unable to preserve a remembrance of 
them?" 

" Would you like to carry away more than the remem- 
brance?" said Captain Nemo. 

" What do you mean by those words?" 

" I mean to say that nothing is easier than to take a 
photographic view of this submarine region." 

I had no time to express my surprise at this new propo- 
sition, when at Captain Nemo's call, an objective was 
brought into the saloon. Through the widely opened 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 213 

panel, the liquid mass was bright with electricity, which 
was distributed with such uniformity, that not a shadow, 
not a gradation, was to be seen in our manufactured light. 
The Nautilus remained motionless, the force of its screw 
subdued by the inclination of its planes; the instrument 
was propped on the bottom of the oceanic site, and in a few 
seconds we had obtained a perfect negative, in which 
could be seen those primitive rocks, which have never 
looked upon the light of heaven; that lowest granite 
which forms the foundation of the globe; those deep 
grottoes, woven in the stony mass whose outlines were 
of such sharpness, and the border lines of which are 
marked in black, as if done by the brush of some 
Flemish artist. Beyond that again a horizon of 
mountains, an admirable undulating line, forming the 
perspective of the landscape. I cannot describe the effect 
of these smooth black, polished rocks, without moss, 
without a spot, and of strange forms, standing solidly on 
the sandy carpet, which sparkled under the jets of our 
electric light. 

But the operation being over, Captain Nemo said, 
" Let us go up; we must not abuse our position, nor ex- 
pose the Nautilus too long to such great pressure." 

" Go up again!" I exclaimed. 

"Hold well on." 

I had not time to understand why the Captain cautioned 
me thus, when I was thrown forward on to the carpet. 
At a signal from the Captain, its screw was shipped, and 
its blades raised vertically; the Nautilus shot into the air 
like a balloon, rising with stunning rapidity, and cutting 
the mass of waters with a sonorous agitation. Nothing 
was visible; and in four minutes it had shot through the 
four leagues which separated it from the ocean, and, after 
emerging like a flying-fish, fell, making the waves rebound 
to an enormous height. 



