CHAPTER IX. 

A VANISHED CONTINENT. 

THE next morning, the 19th of February, I saw the 
Canadian enter my room. I expected this visit. He 
looked very disappointed. 

" Well, sir?" said he. 

" Well, Ned, fortune was against us yesterday." 

" Yes; that captain must needs stop exactly at the hour 
we intended leaving his vessel." 

" Yes, Ned, he had business at his banker's." 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 195 

"His banker's?" 

"His banker's! Or rather bis banking-bouse; by that 
I mean the ocean, where his riches are safer than in the 
chests of the state." 

I then related to the Canadian the incidents of the 
preceding night, hoping to bring him back to the idea 
of not abandoning the captain; but my recital had no 
other result than an energetically expressed regret from 
Ned, that he had not been able to take a walk on the 
battle-field of Vigo on his own account. 

"However," said he, "all is not ended. It is only a 
blow of the harpoon lost. Another time we must succeed; 
and to-night, if necessary " 

" In what direction is the Nautilus going?" I asked. 

" I do not know," replied Ned. 

" Well, at noon we shall see the point." 

The Canadian returned to Conseil. As soon as I was 
dressed, I went into the saloon. The compass was not 
reassuring. The course of the Nautilus was S.S.W. We 
were turning our backs on Europe. 

I waited with some impatience till the ship's place was 
pricked on the chart. At about half-past eleven the 
reservoirs were emptied, and our vessel rose to the surface 
of the ocean. I rushed toward the platform. Ned Land 
had preceded me. No more land in sight. Nothing but 
an immense sea. Some sails on the horizon, doubtless 
those going to San Koque in search of favorable winds for 
doubling the Cape of Good Hope. The weather was 
cloudy. A gale of wind was preparing. Ned raved and 
tried to pierce the cloudy horizon. He still hoped that 
behind all that fog stretched the land he so longed for. 

At noon the sun showed itself for an instant. The 
second mate profited by this brightness to take its height. 
Then the sea becoming more billowy, we descended, and 
the panel closed. 

An hour after, upon consulting the chart, I saw the 
position of the Nautilus was marked at 16 17' longitude, 
and 33 22' latitude, at 150 leagues from the nearest coast. 
There was no means of flight, and I leave you to imagine 
the rage of the Canadian when I informed him of our 
situation. 

For myself, I was not particularly sorry. I felt light- 
ened of the load which had oppresse^me and was able to 



196 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

return with some degree of calmness to my accustomed 
work. 

That night, about eleven o'clock, I received a most un- 
expected visit from Captain Nemo. He asked me very 
graciously if I felt fatigued from my watch of the preced- 
ing night. I answered in the negative. 

" Then M. Aronnax, I propose a curious excursion." 

"Propose, Captain?" 

" You have hitherto only visited the submarine depths 
by daylight, under the brightness of the sun. Would it 
suit you to see them in the darkness of the night?" 

" Most willingly." 

" I warn you, the way will be tiring. We shall have 
far to walk, and must climb a mountain. The roads are 
not well kept." 

" What you say, Captain, only heightens my curiosity; 
I arn ready to follow you." 

" Come then, sir, we will put on our diving-dresses." 

Arrived at the robing-room, I saw that neither of my 
companions nor any of the ship's crew were to follow on 
this excursion. Captain Nemo had not even proposed my 
taking with me either Ned or Conseil. 

In a few moments we had put on our diving-dresses; 
they placed on our backs the reservoirs, abundantly filled 
with air, but no electric lamps were prepared. I called 
the captain's attention to the fact. 

" They will be useless," he replied. 

I thought I had not heard aright, but I could not re- 
peat my observation, for the captain's head had already 
disappeared in its metal case. I finished harnessing my- 
self, I felt them put an iron-pointed stick into my hand, 
and some minutes later, after going through the usual 
form, we set foot on the bottom of the Atlantic, at a depth 
of 150 fathoms. Midnight was near. The waters were 
profoundly dark, but Captain Nemo pointed out in the 
distance a reddish spot, a sort of a large light shining 
brilliantly, about two miles from the Nautilus. What this 
fire might be, what could feed it, why and how it lit up 
the liquid mass, I could not say. In any case, it did light 
our way, vaguely, it is true, but I soon accustomed myself 
to the peculiar darkness, and I understood, under such 
circumstances, the uselessness of the Ruhmkorff apparatus. 

As we advanced, I heard a kind of pattering above my 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 197 

head. The noise redoubling, sometimes producing a con- 
tinual shower, I soon understood the cause. It was rain 
falling violently, and crisping the surface of the waves. 
Instinctively the thought flashed across my mind that I 
should be wet through! By the water! in the midst of the 
water! I could not help laughing at the odd idea. But 
indeed, in thick diving dress, the liquid element is no 
longer felt, and one only seems to be in an atmosphere 
somewhat denser than the terrestrial atmosphere. Noth- 
ing more. t 

After half an hour's walk the soil became stony. Me- 
dusae, microscopic Crustacea, and pennatules lit it slightly 
with their phosphorescent gleam. I caught a glimpse of 
pieces of stone covered with millions of zoophytes and 
masses of sea-weed. My feet often slipped upon this vis- 
cous carpet of sea-weed, and without my iron-tipped stick 
I should have fallen more than once. In turning round, I 
could still see the whitish lantern of the Nautilus begin- 
ning to pale in the distance. 

But the rosy light which guided us increased and lit up 
the horizon. The presence of this fire under water puz- 
zled me in the highest degree. Was it some electric efful- 
gence? Was I going toward a natural phenomenon as yet 
unknown to the savants of the earth? Or even (for this 
thought crossed my brain) had the hand of man aught to 
do with this conflagration? Had he fanned this flame? 
Was I to meet in these depths companions and friends of 
Captain Nemo whom he was going to visit, and who, like 
him, led this strange existence? Should I find down there 
a whole colony of exiles, who, weary of the miseries of 
this earth, had sought and found independence in the 
deep ocean? All these foolish and unreasonable ideas 
pursued me. And in this condition of mind, overexcited 
by the succession of wonders continually passing before 
my eyes, I should not have been surprised to meet at the 
bottom of the sea one of those submarine towns of which 
Captain Nerno dreamed. 

Our road grew lighter and lighter. The white glimmer 
came in rays from the summit of a mountain about 800 
feet high. But what I saw was simply a reflection, de- 
veloped by the clearness of the waters. The source of this 
inexplicable light was a fire on the opposite side of the 
mountain. 



198 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

In the midst of this stony maze, furrowing the bottom 
of ihe Atlantic, Captain Nemo advanced without hesita- 
tion. He knew this dreary road. Doubtless he had often 
traveled over it, and could not lose himself. I followed 
him with unshaken confidence. He seemed to me like a 
genie of the sea; and, as he walked before me, I could not 
help admiring his stature, which was outlined in black on 
the luminous horizon. 

It was one in the morning when we arrived at the first 
slopes of the mountain; but to gain access to them we 
must venture through the difficult paths of a vast copse. 

Yes; a copse of dead trees, without leaves, without sap; 
trees petrified by the action of the water, arid here and 
there overtopped by gigantic pines. It was like a coal pit, 
still standing, holding by the roots to the broken soil, and 
whose branches, like fine black paper cuttings, showed 
distinctly on the watery ceiling. Pictur-3 to yourself a forest 
in the Hartz, hanging on to the sides of the mountain, 
but a forest swallowed up. The paths were encumbered 
with sea-weed and fucus, between which groveled a whole 
world of Crustacea. I went along, climbing the rocks, 
striding over extended trunks breaking the sea bind-weed, 
which hung from one tree to the other; and frightening 
the fishes, which flew from branch to branch. Pressing 
onward, I felt no fatigue. I followed my guide, who was 
never tired. What a spectacle! how can I express it? how 
paint the aspect of those woods and rocks in this medium 
their under parts dark and wild, the upper colored with 
red tints, by that light which the reflecting powers of the 
waters doubled? We climbed rocks, which fell directly 
after with gigantic bounds, and the low growling of an 
avalanche. To right and left ran long dark galleries, where 
sight was lost. Here opened vast glades which the hand 
of man seemed to have worked^ and I sometimes asked 
myself if some inhabitant of these submarine regions would 
not suddenly appear to me. 

But Captain Nemo was still mounting. I could not stay 
behind. I followed boldly. My stick gave me good help. 
A false step would have been dangerous on the narrow 
passes sloping down to the sides of the gulf; but I walked 
with firm step, without feeling any giddiness. Now I 
jumped a crevice the depth of which would have made me 
hesitate had it been among the glaciers on the land; now 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 199 

I ventured on the unsteady trunk of a tree, thrown across 
'rom one abyss to the other, without looking under my 
feet, having only eyes to admire the wild sites of this 
region. 

There, monumental rocks, leaning on their regularly 
cut bases, seemed to defy all laws of equilibrium. From 
between their stony knees, trees sprang, like a jet under 
heavy pressure, and upheld others which upheld them. 
Natural towers, large scraps, cut perpendicularly, like 
a " curtain," inclined at an angle which the laws of 
gravitation could never have tolerated in terrestrial regions. 

Two hours after quitting the Nautilus, we had crossed 
the line of trees, and a hundred feet above our heads 
rose the top of the mountain, which cast a shadow on 
the brilliant irradiation of the opposite slope. Some 
petrified shrubs ran fantastically here and there. Fishes 
got up undrer our feet like birds in the long grass. The 
massive rocks were rent with impenetrable fractures, deep 
grottos, and unfathomable holes, at the bottom of which 
formidable creatures might be heard moving. My blood 
curdled when I saw enormous antennae blocking my road, 
or some frightful claw closing with a noise in the shadow 
of some cavity. Millions of luminous spots shone brightly 
in the midst of the darkness. They were the eyes of giant 
Crustacea crouched in their holes; giant lobsters setting 
themselves up like halberdiers, and moving their claws 
with the clicking sound of pincers; titanic crabs, pointed 
like a gun on its carriage; and frightful-looking poulps, 
interweaving their tentacles like a living nest of serpents. 

We had now arrived on the first platform, where other 
surprises awaited me. Before us lay some picturesque 
ruins, which betrayed the hand of man and not that of 
the Creator. There were vast heaps of stone, amongst 
which might be traced the vague and shadowy forms of 
castles and temples clothed with a world of blossoming 
zoophytes, and over which, instead of ivy, sea- weed and 
fucus threw a thick vegetable mantle. But what was this 
portion of the globe which had been swallowed by cata- 
clysms? Who had placed those rocks and stones like 
cromlechs of pre-historic times? Where was I? Whither 
had Captain Nemo's fancy hurried me? 

I would fain have asked him; not being able to, I 
stopped him I seized his arm. But shaking his head, 



200 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

and pointing to the highest point of the mountain, he 
seemed to say: 

"Come, come along; come higher!" 

I followed, and in a few minutes I had climbed to the 
top, which for a circle of ten yards commanded the whole 
mass of rock. 

I looked down the side we had just climbed. The 
mountain did not rise more than seven or eight hundred 
feet above the level of the plain; but on the opposite side 
it commanded from twice that height the depths of this 
part of the Atlantic. My eyes ranged far over a large 
space lit by a violent fulguration. In fact, the mountain 
was a volcano. 

At fifty feet above the peak, in the midst of a rain of 
stones and scoria?, a large crater was vomiting forth tor- 
rents of lava, which fell in a cascade of fire into the 
bosom of the liquid mass. Tims situated, this volcano lit 
the lower plain like an immense torch, even to the extreme 
limits of the horizon. I said that the submarine crater 
threw up lava, but no flames. Flames require the oxygen 
of the air to feed upon, and cannot be developed under 
water; but streams of lava, having in themselves the prin- 
ciples of their incandescence, can attain a white heat, 
fight rigorously against the liquid element, and turn it to 
vapor by contact. 

Kapid currents bearing all these gases in diffusion, and 
torrents of lava, slid to the bottom of the mountain like 
an eruption of Vesuvius on another Terra del Greco. 

There, indeed, under my eyes, ruined, destroyed, lay a 
town its roofs open to the sky, its temples fallen, ita 
arches dislocated, its columns lying on the ground, from 
which one could still recognize the massive character of 
Tuscan architecture. Further on, some remains of a giant 
aqueduct; here the high base of an Acropolis, with the 
floating outline of a Parthenon; there traoes of a quay, as 
if an ancient port had formerly abutted on the borders of 
the ocean, and disappeared with its merchant vessels and 
its war galleys. Further on again, long lines of sunken 
walls and broad deserted streets a perfect Pompeii es- 
caped beneath the waters. Such was. the sight that Cap- 
tain Nemo brought before my eyes. 

Where was I? Where was I? I must know at any cost. 
I tried to speak, but Captain Nemo stopped me by a 



1 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER Til K SI-AS. 5&gt;!")1 

gesture, and picking up a piece of chalk stone, advanced 
to a rock of black basalt, and traced the one word, 

ATLANTIS. 

What a light shot through my mind: Atlantis, the 
ancient Meropis of Theopompus, the Atlantis of Plato, 
that continent denied by Origen, Jainblichus, D'Anville, 
Malte-Brun, and Humboldt, who placed its disappearance 
among the legendary tales admitted by Posidonius, Plinv, 
Ammianus Marcellinus, Tertullian, Engel, Buffon, and 
D'Avezac. I had it there now before my eyes, bearing 
upon it the unexceptionable testimony of its catastrophe. 
The region thus ingulfed was beyond Europe, Asia, and 
Lybia, beyond the columns of Hercules, where those 
powerful people, the Atlantides, lived, against whom the 
first wars of ancient Greece were waged. 

Thus, led by the strangest destiny, I was treading under 
foot the mountains of this continent, touching with my 
hands those ruins a thousand generations old, and con- 
temporary with the geological epochs. I was walking on 
the very spot where the contemporaries of the first man 
had walked. 

Whilst I was trying to fix in my mind every detail of 
this grand landscape, Captain Nemo remained motionless, 
as if petrified in mute ecstasy, leaning on a mossy stone. 
Was he dreaming of those generations long since disap- 
peared? Was he asking them the secret of human destiny? 
Was it here this strange man came to steep himself in 
historical recollections, and live again this ancient life 
he who wanted no modern one? What would I not have 
given to know his thoughts, to share them, to understand 
them? We remained for an hour at this place, contem- 
plating 'the vast plain under the brightness of the lava, 
which was sometimes wonderfully intense. Rapid trem- 
blings ran along the mountain caused by internal bubblings , 
deep noises distinctly transmitted through the liquid nie-^ 
dium were echoed with majestic grandeur. At this moment 
the moon appeared through the mass of waters, and threw 
her pale rays on the buried continent. It was but a gleam, 
but what an indescribable effect! The captain rose, cast 
one last look on the immense plain, and then bade me fol- 
low him. 

We descended the mountain rapidly, and the mineral 



202 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

forests once passed, I saw the lantern of the Nautilus 
shining like a star. The captain walked straight to it, 
and we got on board as the first rays of the light whitened 
the surface of the ocean. 



