CHAPTER III. 

A PEARL OF TEN MILLIONS. 

THE i\ext morning at four o'clock I was awakened by 
the steward, whom Captain Nemo had placed at my serv- 
ice. I rose hurriedly, dressed, and went into the saloon. 

Captain Nemo was awaiting me. 

" M. Aronnax," said he, " are you ready to start?" 

"I am ready." - 

" Then, please to follow me." 

"And my companions, Captain?" 

" They have been told, and are waiting." 

"Are we not to put on our diver's dresses?" asked I. 

' Not yet. I have not allowed the Nautilus to come 
too near this coast, and we are some distance from the 
Manaar Bank; but the boat is ready, and will take us to 
the exact point of disembarking, which will save us along 
way. It carries our diving apparatus, which we will put 
on "when we begin our submarine journey." 

Captain Nerno conducted me to the central staircase, 
which led on to the platform. Ned and Conseil were 
already there, delighted at the idea of the "pleasure 
party " which was preparing. Five sailors from the Nau- 
tilus, with their oars, waited in the boat, which had been 
made fast against the side. 

The night was still dark. Layers of clouds covered the 
sky, allowing but few stars to be seen. I looked on the 
side where the land lay, and saw nothing but a dark line 
inclosing three parts of the horizon, from southwest to 
northwest. The Nautilus, having returned during the 
night up the western coast of Ceylon, was now west of the 
bay, or rather gulf, formed by the mainland and the island 
of Manaar. There, under the dark waters, stretched the 
pintadine bank, and an inexhaustible field of pearls, the 
length of which is more than_twenty miles. 



150 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

Captain Nemo, Ned Land, Conseil, and I, took our 
places in the stern of the boat. The master went to the 
tiller; his four companions leaned on their oara, the painter 
was cast off, and we sheered off. 

The boat went to toward the south; the oarsmen did 
not hurry. 1 noticed that their strokes, strong in the 
water, only followed each other every ten seconds, accord- 
ing to the method generally adopted in the navy. Whilst 
the craft was running by its own velocity, liquid drops 
struck the dark depths of the waves, the crisply, like spots 
of melted lead. A little billow, spreading wide, gave a 
slight roll to the boat and some samphire reeds flapped 
before it. 

We were silent. What was Captain Nemo thinking of? 
Perhaps of the land he was approaching, and which he 
found too near to him, contrary to the Canadian's opinion, 
who thought it too far off. As to Conseil, he was merely 
there from curiosity. 

About half-past five, the first tints on the horizon 
showed the upper line of coast more distinctly. Flat 
enough in the east, it rose a little to the south. Five 
miles still lay between us, and it was indistinct, owing to 
the mist on the water. At six o'clock it became suddenly 
daylight with that rapidity peculiar to tropical regions, 
which know neither dawn nor twilight. The solar rays 
pierced the curtain of clouds piled upon the eastern 
horizon, and the radiant orb rose rapidly. I saw land 
distinctly, with a few trees scattered here and there. The 
boat neared Manaar Island, which was rounded to the 
south. Captain Nemo rose from his seat and watched the 
sea. 

At a sign from him the anchor was dropped, but the 
chain scarcely ran, for it was little more thau a Yard 
deep, and this spot was one of the highest points of the 
bank of pintadines. 

"Here we are, M. Aronnax," said Captaia Nemo. 
" You see that inclosed bay? Here, in a month, will be 
assembled the numerous fishing-boats of Jthe exporters, 
and these are the waters their divers will ransack so boldly. 
Happily, this bay is well situated for that kind of fish- 
ing. It is sheltered from the strongest winds; the sea is 
never very rough here, which makes \t favorable for the 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 151 

diver's work. We will now put on our dresses, and begin 
our walk." 

I did not answer, and while watching the unsuspected 
waves began with the help of the sailors to put on my 
heavy sea-dress. Captain Nemo and my companions were 
also dressing. None of the Nautilus' men were to accom- 
pany us on this new excursion. 

Soon we were enveloped to the throat in india-rubber 
clothing; the air apparatus fixed to our backs by braces. 
As to the Euhmkorff apparatus, there was no necessity for 
it. Before putting my head into the copper cap, I had 
asked the question of the captain. 

" They would be useless," he replied. " We are going 
to no great depth, and the solar ray will be enough to light 
our walk. Besides, it would not be prudent to carry the 
electric light in these waters; its brilliancy might attract 
some of the dangerous inhabitants of the coast most inop- 
portunely." 

As Captain Nemo pronounced these words, I turned to 
Conseil and Ned Land. But my two friends had already 
incased their heads in the metal caps, and they could 
neither hear nor answer. 

One last question remained to ask of Captain Nemo. 

" And our arms?" asked I; " our guns?" 

"Guns! what for? Do not mountaineers attack the 
bear with daggers in their hand, and is not steel surer than 
lead? Here is a strong blade; put it in your belt, and we 
start." 

I looked at my companions; they were armed like us, 
and more than that, Ned Land was brandishing an enor- 
mous harpoon, which he had placed in the boat before 
leaving the Nautilus. 

Then, following the Captain's example, I allowed myself 
to be dressed in the heavy copper helmet, and our reser- 
voirs of air were at onee in activity. An instant after, we 
were landed, one after the other, in about two feet of 
water, upon an even sand. Captain Nemo made a sigu 
with his hand, and we followed him by a gentle declivity 
till we disappeared under the waves. 

Over our feet, like coveys of snipe in a bog, rose shoals 
of fish, of the genus monoptera, which have no other fins 
but their tail. I recognized the Javanese, a real serpent, 
two and a half feet long, of ft livid color underneath, and. 



152 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

which might easily be mistaken for a conger eel if it was 
not for the golden stripes on its sides. In the genus stro- 
mateus, whose bodies are very flat and oval, I saw some of 
the most brilliant colors, carrying their dorsal fin like a 
scythe; an excellent eating fish, which, dried and pickled, 
is known by the name of Karawade; then some tranque- 
bars, belonging to the genus apsiphoroides, whose body is 
covered with a shell cuirass of eight longitudinal plates. 

The heightening sun lit the mass of waters more and 
more. The soil changed by degrees. To the fine sand 
succeeded a perfect causeway of bowlders, covered with a 
carpet of mollusks and zoophytes. Amongst the speci- 
mens of these branches I noticed some placenae, with thin, 
unequal shells, a kind of ostracion peculiar to the Ked 
Sea and the Indian Ocean; some orange lucinae with 
rounded shells; rock-fish three feet and a half long, which 
raised themselves under the waves like hands ready to 
seize one. There were also some panopyres, slightly lumi- 
nous; and lastly, some oculines, like magnificent fans, 
forming one of the richest vegetations of these seas. 

In the midst of these living plants, and under the arbors 
of the hydrophytes, were layers of clumsy articulates, par- 
ticularly some raninae, whose carapace formed a slightly 
rounded triangle; and sbrne horrible-looking parthenopes. 

At about seven o'clock we found ourselves at last survey- 
ing the oyster banks, on which the pearl-oysters are re- 
produced by millions. 

Captain Nemo pointed with his hand to the enormous 
heap of oysters; and I could well understand that this 
mine was inexhaustible, for nature's creative power is far 
beyond man's instinct of destruction. Ned Land, faith- 
ful to his instincts, hastened to fill a net which he carried 
by his side with some of the finest specimens. But we 
could not stop. ' We must follow the captain, who seemed 
to guide himself by paths known only to himself. The 
ground was sensibly rising, and sometimes, on holding up 
my arm, it was above the surface of the sea. Then the 
level of the bank would sink capriciously. Often we 
rounded high rocks scarped into pyramids. In their dark 
fractures huge Crustacea, perched upon their high claws 
like some war-machine, watched us with fixed eyes, and 
under our feet crawled various kinds of annelides. 

At this moment there opened before us a large grotto, 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 153 

3ug in a picturesque heap of rocks, and carpeted with all 
the thick warp of the submarine flora. At first it seemed 
very dark to me. The solar rajs seemed to be extinguished 
by successive gradations, until its vague transparency 
became nothing more than drowned lightf. Capfain Nemo 
entered; we followed. My eyes soon accustomed them- 
selves to this relative state of darkness. I could dis- 
tinguish the arches springing capriciously from natural 
pillars, standing broad upon their granite base, like the 
heavy columns of Tuscan architecture. Why had' our 
incomprehensible guide led us to the bottom of this sub- 
marine crypt? I was soon to know. After descending a 
rather sharp declivity, our feet .trod the bottom of a kind 
of circular pit. There Captain Nemo stopped, and with 
his hand indicated an object I had not yet perceived. It 
was an oyster of extraordinary dimensions, a gigantic 
tridacne, a goblet which could have contained a whole 
lake of holy water, a basin the breadth of which was more 
than two yards and a half, and consequently larger than 
that ornamenting the saloon of the Nautilus. I ap- 
proached this extraordinary mollusk. It adhered by its 
byssus to a table of granite, and there, isolated, it de- 
veloped itself in the calm waters of the grotto. I esti- 
mated the weight of this tridacne at 600 pounds. Such 
an oyster would contain thirty pounds of meat; and one 
must have the stomach of a Gargantua to demolish some 
dozens of them. 

Captain Nemo was evidently acquainted with the exist- 
ence of this bivalve, and seemed to have a particular 
motive in verifying the actual state of this tridacne. The 
shells were a little open; the captain came near, and put 
his dagger between them to prevent them from closing; 
then with his hand he raised the membrane with its 
fringed edges, which formed a cloak for the creature. 
There, between the folded plaits, I saw a loose pearl, 
whose size equaled that of a cocoanut. Its globular 
shape, perfect clearness, and admirable luster, made it 
altogether a jewel of inestimable value. Carried away by 
my curiosity I stretched out my hand to seize it, weigh it, 
and touch it; but the captain stopped me, made a sign of 
refusal, and quickly withdrew his dagger, and the two 
shells closed suddenly. I then understood Captain Nemo's 
intention. In leaving this pearl hidden in the mantle of 



154: 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

the tridacne, he was allowing it to grow slowly. Each 
year the secretions of the mollusk would add new concen- 
tric circles. I estimated its value at 500,000 at least. 

After ten minutes Captain Nemo stopped suddenly. I 
thought he had halted previously to returning. No; by a 
gesture lie bade us crouch beside him in a deep fracture of 
the rock, his hand pointed to one part of the liquid mass, 
which I watched attentively. 

About five yards from me a shadow appeared, and sank 
to the ground. The disquieting idea of sharks shot 
through my mind, but I was mistaken: and once again it 
was not a monster of the ocean that we had anything to 
do with. 

It was a man, a living man, an Indian, a fisherman, a 
poor devil, who, I suppose, had come to glean before the 
harvest. I could see the bottom of his canoe anchored 
some feet above his head. He dived and went up succes- 
sively. A stone held between his feet, cut in the shape of 
a sugar-loaf, whilst a rope fastened him to his boat, helped 
him to descend more rapidly. This was all his apparatus.. 
Reaching the bottom about five yards deep, he went on his 
knees and filled his bag with oysters picked up at random,, 
Then he went up, emptied it, pulled up his stone, and be- 
gan the operation once more, which lasted thirty seconds,, 

The diver did not see us. The shadow of the rock hid 
us from sight. And how should this poor Indian ever 
dream that men, beings like himself, should be there un- 
der the water watching his movements, and losing no de- 
taij of the fishing? Several times he went up in this way, 
and dived again. He did not carry away more than ten at 
each plunge, for he was obliged to pull them from the 
bank to which they adhered by means of their strong bys- 
sus. And how many of those oysters for which he risked 
his life had no pearl in them! I watched him closely; his 
maneuvers were regular, and, for the space of half an hour, 
no danger appeared to threaten him. 

I was beginning to accustom myself to the sight of thia 
interesting fishing, when suddenly, as the Indian was on 
the ground, I saw him make a gesture of terror, rise, and 
make a spring to return to the surface of the sea. 

I understood his dread. A gigantic shadow appeared 
just above the unfortunate diver. It was a shark of 
enormous size advancing diagonally, his eyes on fire, and 



20,000 LEAGfES UKDER THE SEAS. 155 

his jaws open. I was mute with horror, and unable to 
move. 

The voracious creature shot toward the Indian, who 
threw himself on one side in order to avoid the shark's 
fins; but not its tail, for it struck his chest, and stretched 
him on the ground. 

This scene lasted but a few seconds ; the shark returned, 
aud, turning on his back, prepared himself for cutting 
the Indian in two, when I saw Captain Nemo rise sud- 
denly, and then, dagger in hand, walk straight to the mon- 
ster, ready to fight face to face with him. The very 
moment the shark was going to snap the unhappy fisher- 
man in two, he perceived his new adversary, and turning 
over, made straight toward him. 

I can still see Captain Nemo's position. Holding him- 
self well together, he waited for the shark with admirable 
coolness ; and when it rushed at him, threw himself on 
one side with wonderful quickness, avoiding the shock, 
and burying his dagger deep into its side. 

But it was not all over. A terrible combat ensued. 

The shark had seemed to roar, if I might say so. The 
blood rushed in torrents from its wounds. The sea was 
dyed red, and through the opaque liquid I could distin- 
guish nothing more. Nothing more until the moment 
when, like lightning, I saw the undaunted captain hang- 
ing on to one of the creature's fins, struggling, as it were, 
hand to hand with the monster, and dealing successive 
blows at his enemy, yet still unable to give a decisive 
one 

The shark's struggles agitated the water with such fury 
that the rocking threatened to upset me. 

I wanted to go to the captain's assistance, but, nailed 
to the spot with horror, I could not stir. 

I saw the haggard eye: I saw the different phases of the 
figlit. The captain fell to the earth, upset by the enor- 
mous mass which leant upon him. The shark's jaws 
opened wide, like a pair of factory shears, and it would 
have been all over with the captain; but, quick as thought, 
harpoon in hand, Ned Land rushed toward the shark and 
struck it with its sharp point. 

The waves were impregnated with a mass of blood. 
They rocked under the shark's movements, which beat 
them with indescribable fury. Ned Land had not missed 



150 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS." 

his aim. It was the monster's death-rattle. Struck to 
the heart, it struggled in dreadful convulsions, the shock 
of which overthrew Conseil. 

But Ned Land had disentangled the captain, who, get- 
ting up without any wound, went straight to the Indian, 
quickly cut the cord which held him to the stone, took 
him in his arms, and, with a sharp blow of his heel, 
mounted to the surface. 

We all three followed in a few seconds, saved Jby a 
miracle, and reached the fisherman's boat. 

Captain Nemo's first care was to recall the unfortunate 
man to life again. I did not think he could succeed. I 
hoped so, for the poor creature's immersion was not long; 
but the blow from the shark's tail might have been his 
death-blow. 

Happily, with the captain's and Conseil's sharp friction, 
I saw consciousness return by degrees. He opened his 
eyes. What was his surprise, his terror even, at seeing 
four great copper heads leaning over him! And above all, 
what must he have thought when Captain Nemo, draw- 
ing from the pocket of his dress a bag of pearls, placed ifc 
in his hand! This munificent charity from the man of 
the waters to the poor Cingalese was accepted with a 
trembling hand. His wonderful eyes showed that he knew 
not to what superhuman beings he owed both fortune 
and life. 

At a sign from the captain we regained the bank, and 
following the road already traversed, came, in about half 
an hour, to the anchor which held the canoe of the Nau- 
tilus to the earth. 

Once on board, we each, with the help of the sailors, 
got rid of the heavy copper helmet. 

Captain Nemo's first word was to the Canadian. 

"Thank you, Master Land," said he. 

" It was in revenge, Captain," replied Ned Land. " I 
owed you that." 

A ghastly smile passed across the Captain's lips, and 
that was all. 

" To the Nautilus," said he. 

The boat flew over the waves. Some minutes after, we 
met the shark's dead body floating. By the black mark- 
ing of the extremity of its fins, I recognized the terrible 
melanopteron of the Indian Seas of the species of shark 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 15? 

properly so called. It was more than twenty-five feet 
long; its enormous mouth occupied one-third of its body. 
H was an adult, as was known by its six rows of teeth 
placed in an isosceles triangle in the upper jaw. 

Conseil looked at it with scientific interest, and I am 
sure that he placed it, and not without reason, in the car- 
tilaginous class, of the chondropterygian order, with fixed 
gills, of the selacian family, in the genus of the sharks. 

Whilst I was contemplating this inert mass, a dozen of 
these voracious beasts appeared round the boat, and with- 
out noticing us, threw themselves upon the dead body and 
fought with one another for the pieces. 

At half-past eight we were again on board the Nautilus. 
There I reflected on the incidents vhich had taken placa 
in our excursion to the Manaar Bank. 

Two conclusions I must inevitably draw from it one 
bearing upon the unparalleled courage of Captain Nemo, 
the other upon his devotion to a human being, a repre- 
sentative of that race from which he fled beneath the seas. 
Wliatever he might say, this strange man had not yet suc- 
ceeded in entirely crushing his heart. 

When I made this observation to him, he answered in a 
slightly moved tone: 

" That Indian, sir, is an inhabitant of an oppressed 
country; and I am still, and shall be, to my last breath, 
a friend of them!" 



