CHAPTER XVII. 

FROM CAPE HORN TO THE AMAZON. 

How I got on the platform, I have no idea; perhaps the 
Canadian had carried me there. But I breathed, I inhaled 
the vivifying sea-air. My two companions were getting 
drunk with the fresh particles. The other unhappy men 
had been so long without food, that they could *not with 
impunity indulge in the simplest aliments that were given 
them. We, on the contrary, had no need to restrain our- 
selves; we could draw this air freely into our lungs, and it 
was the breeze, the breeze alone 1 , that filled us with this 
keen enjoyment. 

"Ah!" said Conseil, " how delightful this oxygen is! 
Master need not fear to breathe it. There is enough for 
everybody. " 

Ned Land did not speak, but he opened his jaws wide 
enough to frighten a shark. Our strength soon returned, 
and when I looked round me, I saw we were alone on the 
platform. The foreign seamen in the Nautilus were con- 
tented with the air that circulated in the interior; none of 
them had come to drink in the open air, 

The first words I spoke were words of gratitude and 
thankfulness to my two companions. Ned and Conseil 
had prolonged my life during the last hours of this long 
agooy. All my gratitude could not repay such devotion. 

" My friends," said I, " we are bound one to the other 
forever, and I am under infinite obligations to you." 

" Which I shall take advantage of," exclaimed the Ca- 
nadian. 

" What do you mean?" said Conseil. 

" I mean that I shall take you with me when I leave 
this infernal Nautilus." 

" Well," said Conseil, " after all this, are we going 
right?" 

" Yes," I replied, " for we are going the way of the sun, 
and here the sun is in the north." 

"No doubt," said Ned Land; "but it remains to be 
seen whether he will bring the ship into the Pacific or 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 253 

the Atlantic Ocean; that is, into frequented or deserted 
seas." 

I could not answer that question, and I feared that 
Captain Nemo would rather take us to the vast ocean that 
touches the coast of Asia and America at the same time. 
He would thus complete the tour round the submarine 
world, and return to those waters in which the Nautilus 
could sail freely. We ought, before long, to settle this 
important point. The Nautilus went at a rapid pace. 
The polar circle was soon parsed, and the course shaped, 
fofr Cape Horn. We were off the American point, March 
31, at seven o'clock in the evening Then all our past 
sufferings were forgotten. The remembrance of that im- 
prisonment in the ice was effaced from our minds. We 
only thought of the future. Captain Nemo did not appear 
again either in the drawing-room or on the platform. The 
point shown each day on the planisphere, and marked by 
the lieutenant, showed me the exact direction of the 
Nautilus. Now, on that evening, it was evident, *:o my 
great satisfaction, that we were going back to the North 
by the Atlantic. The next day, April 1, when the Nau- 
tilus ascended to the surface, some minutes before noon, 
we sighted land to the west. It was Terra del Fuego, 
which the first navigators named thus from seeing the 
quantity of smoke which rose from the natives' huts. 
The coast seemed low to me,- but in the distance rose 
high mountains. I even thought I had a glimpse of 
Mount Sarmiento, that rises 2,070 yards above the level 
of the sea, with a very pointed summit, which, accord- 
ingly as it is misty or clear, is a sign of fine or of wet 
weather. At this moment the peak was clearly defined 
against the sky. The Nautilus, diving again under the 
water, approached the coast, which v/as only some few 
miles off. From the glass windows in the drawing-room, 
I saw long sea- weeds, and gigantic fuci, and varech, of 
which the open polar sea contains so many specimens, with 
their sharp polished filaments; they measured about 300 
yards in length real cables, thicker than one's thumb; 
and having great tenacity, they are often used as ropes for 
vessels. Another weed known as velp, with leaves four 
feet long, buried in the coral concretions, hung at the bot- 
tom. It served as nest and food for myriads of Crustacea 
and mollusks, crabs and cuttle-fig!). There sea-s an 1 otter* 



254 20,000 LEAGUES UXDEK THE SEA8. 

had splendid repasts, eating the flesh of fish with sea-vege- 
tables, according to the English fashion. Over this fertile 
and luxuriant ground the Nautilus passed with great rapid- 
ity. Toward evening it approached the Falkland group, 
the rough summits of which I recognized the following 
day. The depth of the sea was moderate. On the shores, 
our nets brought in beautiful specimens of sea-weed, and 
particularly a certain fucus, the roots of which were filled 
with the best mussels in the world. Geese and ducks fell 
by dozens on the platform, and soon took their places in 
the pantry on board. With regard to fish, I observed es- 
pecially specimens of the goby species, some two feet long, 
all over white and yellow spots. I admired also numerous 
medusae, and the finest of the sort, the crysaora. peculiar 
to the sea about the Falkland Isles. I should have liked 
to preserve some specimens of these delicate zoophytes; 
but they are only like clouds, shadows, apparitions, that 
sink and evaporate, when out of their native element. 

When the last heights of the Falklands had disappeared 
from the horizon flie Nautilus sank to between twenty and 
twenty-five yards, and followed the Amefican coast. 
Captain Nemo did not show himself. Until the 3d of 
April we did not quit the shores of Patagonia, sometimes 
under the ocean, sometimes at the surface. The Nautilus 
passed beyond the large estuary formed by the mouth of 
the Plata, and was on the 4th of April, fifty-six riiiles off 
Uruguay. Its direction was northward, and followed 
the long windings of the coast of South America. We 
had then made 16,000 miles since our embarkation in the 
seas of Japan. About eleven o'clock in the morning the 
Tropic of Capricorn was crossed on the thirty-seventh 
meridian, and we passed Cape Frio standing out to sea. 
Captain Nemo, to Ned Land's great displeasure, did not 
like the neighborhood of the inhabited coasts of Brazil, 
for we went at a giddy speed. Not a fish, not a bird of 
the swiftest kind could follow us, and the natural curiosi- 
ties of these seas escaped all observation. 

This speed was kept up for several days, and in the 
evening of the 9th of April we sighted the most easterly 
point of South America that forms Cape San Roque. But 
then the Nautilus swerved again, and sought the lowest 
depth of a submarine valley which is between this cape 
and Sierra Leone on the African coast. This valley 



20,000 LEAGUES UKDEIl THE SEAS. 255 

bifurcates to the parallel of the Antilles, and terminates 
at the north by the enormous depression of 9,000 yards. 
In this place,, the geological basin of the ocean forms, as 
far as the Lesser Antilles, a cliff of three and a half miles 
perpendicular in height, and at the parallel of the Cape 
Verd Islands, another wall not* less considerable, that 
incloses thus all the sunk continent of the Atlantic. The 
bottom of this immense valley is dotted with some mount- 
ains, that give .to these submarine places a picturesque 
aspect. I speak, moreover, from the manuscript charts 
that were in the library of the Nautilus charts evidently 
due to Captain Nemo's hand, and made after his personal 
observations. For two days the desert and deep waters 
were visited by means of the inclined planes. The Nau- 
tilus was furnished with long diagonal broadsides which 
carried it to all elevations. But on the llth of April, it 
rose suddenly and land appeared at the mouth of the 
Amazon River, a vast estuary, the embouchure of which 
is so considerable that it freshens the sea-water for the 
distance of several leagues. 

The equator was crossed. Twenty miles to the west 
were the Guianas, a French territory, on which we could 
have found an easy refuge; but a stiff breeze was blowing, 
and the furious waves would not have allowed a single 
boat to face them. Ned Land understood that, no doubt, 
for he spoke not a word about it. For my part, I made 
no allusions to his schemes of flight, for I would not urge 
him to make an attempt that must inevitably fail. I made 
the time pass pleasantly by interesting studies. During 
the days of April llth and 12th, the Nautilus did not 
leave the surface of the sea, and the net brought in a 
marvelous haul of zoophytes, fish and reptiles. Some 
zoophytes had been fished up by the chain of the nets; 
they were for the most part beautiful phyctallines, belong- 
ing to the actinidian family, and among other species the 
phyctalis protexta, peculiar to that part of the ocean, 
with a little cylindrical trunk, ornamented with vertical 
lines, speckled with red dots, crowning a marvelous blos- 
soming of tentacles. As to the mollusks, they consisted 
of some I had already observed turritellas, olive por- 
phyras, with regular lines intercrossed, with red spots 
standing out plainly against the flesh; odd peteroceras, 
like petrified scorpions; translucid hyaleas, argonauts, 



256 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

cuttle-fish (excellent eating), and certain species of cala- 
mars that naturalists of antiquity have classed amongst 
the flying-fish, and that serve principally for bait for cod- 
fishing. I had not an opportunity of studying several 
species of fish on these shores. Amongst the cartilagi- 
nous ones, petromyzons-pricka, a sort of eel, fifteen inches 
long, with a greenish head, violet fins, gray-blue back, 
brown belly, silvered and sown with bright spots, the 
pupil of the eye encircled with gold a curious animal, 
that the current of the Amazon had drawn to the sea, for 
they inhabit fresh waters tuberculated streaks, with 
pointed snouts and a long loose tail, armed with long 
jagged stings; little sharks, a yard long, gray and whitish 
skin, and several rows of teeth bent back that are gen- 
erally known by the name of pantouffles; vespertilios, a 
kind of isosceles triangle, half a yard long, to which pec- 
terals are attached by fleshy prolongations that make them 
look like bats, but that their horny appendage, situated 
near the nostrils, has given them the name of sea-uni- 
corns; lastly, some species of balistae, the curassavian, 
whose spots were of a brilliant gold color, and the capris- 
cus of clear violet, and with varying shades like a pigeon ? s 
throat. 

I end here this catalogue, which is somewhat dry, per- 
haps, but very exact, with a series of bony fish that I 
observed in passing belonged to the apteronotes, and whose 
snout is white as snow, the body of a beautiful black, 
marked with a very long loose fleshy strip; odontognathes, 
armed with spikes; sardines, nine inches long, glittering 
with a bright silver light; a species of mackerel provided 
with two anal fins: centronotes of a blackish tint, that 
are fished for with torches, long fish, two yards in length, 
with fat flesh, white and firm, which, when they are fresh, 
taste like eel, and when dry, like smoked salmon; labres, 
half red, covered with scales only at the bottom of the 
dorsal and anal fins; chrysoptera, on which gold and silver 
blend their brightness with that of the ruby and topaz; 
golden-tailed spares, the flesh of which is extremely deli- 
cate, and whose phosphorescent properties betray them in 
the midst of the \vaters; orange- colored spares, with a 
long tongue; maigres, with gold caudal fins, dark thorn- 
tails, anableps of Surinam, etc. 

Notwithstanding this " etcetera/' I must not omit to 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 257 

mention fish tliat Conseil will long remember, .and with 
good reason. One of our nets had hauled up a sort of 
very flat rayfish, which, with the tail cut off, formed a 
perfect disk, and weighed twenty ounces. It was white 
underneath, red above, with large round spots of dark 
blue encircled with black, very glossy skin, terminating in 
a bilobed fin. Laid out on the platform, it struggled, 
tried to turn itself by convulsive movements, and made so 
many efforts that one last turn had nearly sent it into the 
sea. But Conseil, not wishing to let the fish go, rushed 
to it, and, before I could prevent him, had seized it with 
both hands. In a moment he was overthrown, his legs in 
the air, and half his body paralyzed, crying: 

" master, master! come to me!" 

It was the first time the poor boy had not spoken to me 
in the third person. The Canadian and I took him up, 
and ru'bbed his contracted arms till he became sensible. 
The unfortunate Conseil had attacked a cramp-fish of the 
most dangerous kind the cutnana. This odd animal, in 
a medium conductor like water, strikes fish at several yards, 
distance, so great is the power of its electric organ, the two 
principal surfaces of which do not measure less than twenty- 
seven square feet. The next day, April 12, the Nautilus 
approached the Dutch coast, near the mouth of the Maroni. 
There several groups of sea-cows herded together; they 
were manatees, that, like the dugong and the stellera, be- 
long to the sirenian order. These beautiful animals, peace- 
able and inoffensive, from eighteen to twenty-one feet in 
length, weigh at least sixteen hundred weight. I told Ned 
Land and Conseil that provident nature had assigned an 
important role to these mammalia. Indeed, they, like the 
seals, are designed to graze on the submarine prairies, and 
thus destroy the accumulation of weed that obstructs the 
tropical rivers. 

"And do you know," I added, " what has been the re- 
sult since men have almost entirely annihilated this useful 
race? That the putrefied weeds have poisoned the air, and 
the poisoned air causes the yollow fever, that desolates 
these beautiful countries. Enormous vegetations are mul- 
tiplied under the torrid seas, and the evil is irresistibly 
developed from the mouth of the Rio de la Plata to Florida. 
If we are to believe Toussenel, this plague is nothing to 
what it would be if the seas were cleared of whales and 



258 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

seals. Then, infested with poulps, medusse, and cuttle- 
fish, they would become immense centers of infection, 
since their waves would not possess 'these vast stomachs 
that God had charged to infest the surface of the seas.'" 

However, without, disputing these theories, the crew 
of the Nautilus took possession of half a dozen manatees. 
They provisioned the larders with excellent flesh superior 
to beef and veal. This sport was not interesting. The 
manatees allowed themselves to be hit without defending 
themselves. Several thousand pounds of meat were stored 
up on board to be dried. On this day a successful haul 
of fish increased the stores of the Nautilus, so full of 
game were these seas. They were echeneides belonging 
to the third family of the malacopterygiens: their flattened 
disks were composed of transverse movable cartilaginous 
plates, by which the animal was enabled to create a 
vacuum, and so to adhere to any object like a cupping- 
glass. The remoria that I had observed in the Mediter- 
ranean belongs to this species. But the one of which 
we are speaking was the echeneis ostecchera, peculiar to 
this sea. 

The fishing over, the Nautilus neared the coast. About 
here a number of sea-turtles were sleeping on the surface 
of the water. It would have been difficult to capture 
these precious reptiles, for the least noise awakens them, 
and their solid skull is proof against the harpoon, But 
the echeneis effects their capture with extraordinary precis- 
ion and certainty. This animal, is indeed, a living fish- 
hook, which would make the fortune of an experienced 
fisherman. The crew of the Nautilus tied a ring to the 
tail of these fish, so large as not to encumber their move- 
ments, and to this ring a long cord, lashed to the ship's 
aide by the other end. The echeneides, thrown into the 
sea, directly began their game, and fixed themselves to the 
breastplate of the turtles. Their tenacity was such that 
they were torn rather than let go their hold. The men 
hauled them on board, and with them the turtles to which 
they adhered. They also took several cacouannes a yard 
long which weighed 400 pounds. Their carapace covered 
with large horny plates, thin, transparent, brown, with 
white, and yellow spots, fetch a good price in the market. 
Besides, they were excellent in a edible point of vieiv, as 
well as the fresh turtles, which have an exquisite flavor. 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 259 

The day's fishing brought to a close our stay on the shores 
of the Amazon, and by nightfall the Nautilus had regained 
the high seas. 



