CHAPTER XV. 

THE BOTTOM OF THE SEA. 

THIS cell was, to speak correctly, the arsenal and ward- 
robe of the Nautilus. A dozen diving apparatuses hung 
from the partition, waiting our use. 

Ned Land, on seeing them, showed evident repugnance 
to dress himself in one. 

" But, my worthy Ned, the forests of the Island of 
Crespo are nothing but submarine forests." 

"Good!" said the disappointed harpooner, who saw 
his dreams of fresh meat fade a\vuv. "And you 3 M. 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 81 

Aronnax, are you going to dress yourself in those 
clothes?" 

"There is no alternative, Master Ned." 

"As you please, sir," replied the harpooner, shrugging 
his shoulders; " but as for me, unless I am forced, I will 
never get into one." 

"No one will force you, Master Ned," said Captain 
Nemo. 

" Is Conseil going to risk it?" asked Ned. 

" I follow my master wherever he goes," replied Con- 
seil. 

At the captain's call two of the ship's crew came to 
help us to dress in these heavy and impervious clothes 
made of india-rubber without seam, and "constructed ex- 
pressly to resist considerable pressure. One would have 
thought it a suit of armor, both supple and resisting. 
This suit formed trousers and waistcoat. The trousers 
were finished off with thick boots, weighted with heavy 
leaden soles. The texture of the waistcoat was held to- 
gether by bands of copper, which crossed the chest, protect- 
ing it from the great pressure of the water, and leaving 
the lungs free to act; the sleeves ended in gloves, which 
in no way restrained the movement of the hands. There 
was a vast difference noticeable between these consum- 
mate apparatuses and the old cork breastplates, jackets, 
and other contrivances in vogue during the eighteenth 
century. 

Captain Nemo and one of his companions (a sort of 
Hercules, who must have possessed great strength), Con- 
seil and myself, were soon enveloped in the dresses. There 
remained nothing more to be done but to inclose our 
heads in the metal box. But before proceeding to this 
operation, I asked the captain's permission to examine the 
guns we were to carry. 

One of the Nautilus men gave me a simple gun, the 
but-end of which, made of steel hollow in the center, 
was rather large. It served as a reservoir for compressed 
air, which a valve, worked by a spring, allowed to escape 
into a metal tube. A box of projectiles, in a groove in 
the thickness of the but-end, contained about twenty of 
these electric balls which by means of a spring were forced 
into the barrel of the gun. As soon as one shot was fired, 
another was ready. 



82 20,000 LEAQtTES UKDER THE SEAS. 

"Captain Nemo," said I, "this arm is perfect, and 
easily handled; I only ask to be allowed to try it. But 
how shall we gain the bottom of the sea?" 

"At this moment, Professor, the Nautilus is stranded 
in five fathoms, and we have nothing to do but to start." 

" But how shall we get off?" 

"You shall see." 

Captain Nemo thrust his head into the helmet; Conseil 
and I did the same, not without hearing an ironical " Good 
Sport!" from the Canadian. The upper part of our dress 
terminated in a copper collar, upon which was screwed the 
metal helmet. Three holes, protected by thick glass, al- 
lowed us to see in all directions, by simply turning our 
heads in the interior of the head-dress. As soon as it was 
in position, the Eouquayrol apparatus on our backs began 
to act; and for my part, I could breathe with ease. 

With the Ruhmkorff lamp hanging from my belt, and 
the gun in my hand, I was ready to set out. But, to speak 
the truth, imprisoned in these heavy garments, and glued 
to the deck by my leaden soles, it was impossible for me 
to take a step. 

But this state of things was provided for. I felt myself 
being pushed into a little room contiguous to the wardrobe- 
room. My companions followed, towed along in the same 
way. I heard a water-tight door, furnished with stopper- 
plates, close upon us, and we were wrapped in profound 
darkness. 

After some minutes, -a loud hissing was heard. I feel 
the cold mount from my feet to my chest. Evidently from 
some part of the vessel they had by means of a tap given 
entrance to the water, which was invading us, and with 
which the room was soon filled. A second door cut in the 
side of the Nautilus then opened. We saw a faint light. 
In another instant our feet trod the bottom of the sea. 

And now, how can I retrace the impression left upon 
me by that walk under the waters? Words are impotent 
to relate such wonders! Captain Nemo walked in front, 
his companions followed some steps behind. Conseil and 
I remained near each other, as if an exchange of words had 
been possible through our metallic cases. I no longer felt 
the weight of my clothing, or my shoes, of my reservoir 
of air, or of my thick helmet, in the midst of which my 
head rattled like an almond in its shell. 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 83 

The light, which lit the soil thirty feet below the sur- 
face of the ocean, astonished me by its power. The solar 
rays shone through the watery mass easily, and dissipated 
all color, and I clearly distinguished objects at a distance 
of a hundred and fifty yards. Beyond that the tints dark- 
ened into fine gradations of ultra-marine, and faded into 
vague obscurity. Truly this water which surrounded me 
was but another air denser than the terrestrial atmosphere, 
but almost as transparent. Above me was the calm sur- 
face of the sea. We were walking on fine, even sand, not 
wrinkled, as on a flat shore, which retains the impression 
of the billows. This dazzling carpet, really a reflector, 
repelled the rays of the sun with wonderful intensity, 
which accounted for the vibration which penetrated every 
atom of liquid. Shall I be believed when I say that, at 
the depth of thirty feet, I could see as if I was in broad 
daylight? 

For a quarter of an hour I trod on this sand, sown with 
the impalpable dust of shells. The hull of the Nautilus, 
resembling a long shoal, disappeared by degrees; but its 
lantern, when darkness should overtake us in the waters, 
would help to guide us on board by its distinct rays. 

Soon forms of objects outlined in the distance were dis- 
cernible. I recognized magnificent rocks, hung with a 
tapestry of zoophytes of the most beautiful kind, and I 
was at first struck by the peculiar effect of this medium. 

It was then ten in the morning; the rays of the sun 
struck the surface of the waves at rather an oblique angle, 
and at the touch of their light, decomposed by refraction 
as through a prism, flowers, rocks, plants, shells, and 
polypi were shaded at the edges by the seven solar colors. 
It was marvelous, a feast for the eyes, this complication 
of colored tints, a perfect kaleidoscope of green, yellow, 
orange, violet, indigo, and blue; in one word, the whole 
palette of an enthusiastic colorist! Why could I not com- 
municate to Conseil the lively sensations which were 
mounting to my brain, and rival him in expressions of ad- 
miration? For aught I knew, Captain Nemo and his 
companion might be able to exchange thoughts by means 
of signs previously agreed upon. So for want of better, I 
talked to myself; I declaimed in the copper box which 
covered my head, thereby expending more air in vain words 
than was, perhaps, expedient, , 



84 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

Various kinds of isis, clusters of pure tuft-coral, prickly 
fungi, and anemones, formed a brilliant garden of flowers, 
enameled with porphitae, decked with their collarettes ot 
blue tentacles, sea-stars studding the sandy bottom, to- 
gether with asterophytons like fine lace embroidered by 
the hands of naiads; whose festoons were waved by the 
gentle undulations caused by our walk. It was a real 
grief to me to crush under my feet the brilliant specimens 
of molluscs which strewed the ground by thousands, of 
hammerheads, donaciae (veritable bounding shells), of 
staircases, and red helmet-shells, angel-wings, and many 
others produced by this inexhaustible ocean. But we 
were bound to walk, so we went on, whilst above our heads 
waved shoals of physalidea, leaving their tentacles to float 
in their train, medusae whose umbrellas of opal or rose- 
pink, escaloped with a band of blue, sheltered us from 
the rays of the sun and fiery pelagiae, which, in the dark- 
ness, would have strewn our path with phosphorescent 
light. 

All these wonders I saw in the space of a quarter of a 
mile, scarcely stopping, and following Captain Nemo, who 
beckoned me on by signs. Soon the nature of the soil 
changed; to the sandy plain succeeded an extent of slimy 
mud, which the Americans call "ooze," composed of equal 
parts of silicious and calcareous shells. We then traveled 
over a plain of sea-weed of wild and luxuriant vegetation. 
This sward was of close texture, and soft to the feet, and 
rivaled the softest carpet woven by the hand of man. But 
whilst verdure was spread at,our feet, it did not abandon 
our heads. A light network of marine plants, of that 
inexhaustible family of sea-weeds of which more than two 
thousand kinds are known, grew on the surface of the 
water. I saw long ribbons of fucus floating, some glob- 
ular, others tuberous; laurenciae and cladostephi of most 
delicate foliage, and some rhodomenige palinatae, resem- 
bling the fan of a cactus. I noticed that the green plants 
kept nearer the top of the sea whilst the red were at a 
greater depth, leaving to the black or brown hydrophytes 
the care of forming gardens and parterres in the remote 
beds of the ocean. 

We had quitted the Nautilus about an hour and a half. 
It was near noon; I knew by the perpendicularity of the 
Bun's rays, which were no longer refracted. The magicaf 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 85 

colors disappeared by degrees, and the shades of emerald 
and sapphire were effaced. We walked with a regular 
step, which rang upon the ground with astonishing in- 
tensity; the slightest noise was transmitted with a quick- 
ness to which the ear is unaccustomed on the earth; indeed,, 
water is a better conductor of sound than air, in the ratio 
of four to one. At this period the earth sloped downward; 
the light took a uniform tint. We were at a depth of a 
hundred and five yards and twenty inches, undergoing a 
pressure of six atmospheres. 

At this depth I could still see the rays of the sun, 
though feebly; to their intense brilliancy had succeeded 
a reddish twilight, the lowest state between day and night; 
but we could still see well enough; it was not necessary to 
resort to the Ruhmkorff apparatus as yet. At this mo- 
ment Captain Nemo stopped; he waited till I joined him, 
and then pointed to an obscure mass, looming in the 
shadow, at a short distance. 

" It is the forest of the Island of Crespo," thought I; 
and I was not mistaken. 



