CHAPTER XI. 

ALL BY ELECTRICITY. 

"SiR," said Captain Nemo, showing me the instru- 
ments hanging on the walls of his room, " here are the 
contrivances required for the navigation of the Nautilus. 
Here, as in the drawing-room, I have them always under 
my eyes, and they indicate my position and exact direction 
in the middle of the ocean. Some are known to yon, such 
as the thermometer, which gives the internal temperature 
of the Nautilus; the barometer, which indicates the weight 
o the air and foretells the changes of weather; the hy- 
drometer, which marks the dryness of the atmosphere; the 
storm-glass, the contents of which, by decomposing, an- 
nounce the approach of tempests; the compass, which 
guides my course; the sextant, which shows the latitude 



60 S0,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

by the altitude of the sun; chronometers, by which I cal- 
culate the longitude; and glasses for day and night, which 
I use to examine the points of the horizon when the 
Nautilus rises to the surface of the waves." 

"These are the usual nautical instruments," I replied, 
"and I know the use of them. But these others, no 
doubt, answer to the particular requirements of the Nau- 
tilus. This dial witli the movable needle, is amonometer, 
is it not?" 

" It is actually a monometer, but by communication with 
the water, whose external pressure it indicates, it gives 
our depth at the same time." 

" And these other instruments, the use of which I can- 
not guess?" 

" Here, Professor, I ought to give you some explanations. 
Will you be kind enough to listen to me?" 

He was silent for a few moments, then he said: 

"There is a powerful agent,- obedient, rapid, easy, 
which conforms to every use, and reigns supreme on board 
my vessel. Everything is done by means of it. It lights 
it, warms it, and is the soul of nay mechanical apparatus. 
This agent is electricity." 

" Electricity?" I cried, in surprise. 

"Yes, sir." 

"Nevertheless, Captain, you possess'an extreme rapidity 
of movement, which does not agree well with the power of 
electricity. Until now its dynamic force has remained 
under restraint, and has only been able to produce a small 
amount of power." 

" Professor," said Captain Nemo, " my electricity is 
not everybody's. You know what sea-water is composed 
of. In a thousand grammes are found 96 1-2 per cent, of 
water, and about 2 2-3 per cent, of chloride of sodium; 
then in a smaller quantity, chlorides of magnesium and of 
potassium, bromide of magnesium, sulphate of magnesia, 
sulphate and carbonate of lime. You see, then, that 
chloride of sodium forms a large part of it. So it is this 
sodium that I extract from sea-water, and of which I 
compose my ingredients. I owe all to the ocean; it 
produces electricity, and electricity gives heat, light, mo- 
tion, and, in a word, life to the Nautilus." 

" But not the air your breathe?" 

" 0, I could manufacture the air necessary for my con- 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 61 

sumption, but it is useless, because I go up to the surface 
of the water when I please. However, if electricity does 
not furnish me with air to breathe, it works at least the 
powerful pumps that are stored in 'spacious reservoirs, 
and which enable me to prolong at need, and as long as I 
will, my stay in the depths of the sea. It gives a uniform 
and uninterrnittent light, which the sun does not. Now 
look at this clock; it is electrical, and goes with a regular- 
ity that defies the best chronometers. I have divided it 
into twenty-four hours, like the Italian clocks, because 
for me there is neither night" nor day, sun nor moon, but 
only that factitious light that I take with me to the 
bottom of the sea. Look! just now, it is ten o'clock in the 
morning." 

" Exactly." 

"Another application of electricity. This dial hanging 
in front of us indicates the speed of the Nautilus. An 
electric thread puts it in communication with the screw, 
and the needle indicates the real speed. Look! now we 
are spinning along with a uniform speed of fifteen miles 
an hour." 

" It is marvelous! and I see, Captain, you were right to 
make use of this agent that takes the place of wind, water, 
and steam." 

" We have not finished, M. Aronnax," said Captain 
Nemo, rising; " if you will follow me, we will examine 
the stern of the Nautilus." 

Eeally, I knew already the anterior part of l\us sub- 
marine boat, of which this is the exact division, starting 
from the ship's head: the dining-room, five yards long, 
separated from the library by a water-tight partition; 
the library, five yards long; the large drawing-room, 
ten yards long, separated from the captain's room by 
a second water-tight partition; the said room, five yards 
in length; mine, two and a half yards; and lastly, a reser- 
voir of air, seven and a half yards, that extended to the bows. 
Total length thirty-five yards, or one hundred and five 
feet. The partitions had doors that were shut hermetic- 
ally by means of india-rubber instruments, and they in- 
sured the safety of the Nautilus in case of a leak. 

I followed Captain Nemo through the waist, and arrived 
at the center of the boat. There was a sort of well that 
opened between two partitions. An iron ladder, fastened 



62 20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS. 

with an iron hook to the partition,' led to the upper end. 
I asked the captain what the ladder was used for. 

"It leads to the small boat," he said. 

"What! have you a boat?" I exclaimed, in surprise. 

"Of course; an excellent vessel, light and insubmer- 
sible, that serves either as a fishing or as a pleasure boat." 

" Bu f then, when you wish to embark, you are obliged 
to come to the surface of the water?" 

"Not at all. This boat is attached to the upper ^part 
of the hull of the Nautilus, and occupies a cavity made 
for it. It is decked, quite water-tight, and held together 
by solid bolts. This ladder leads to a man-hole made in 
the hull of the Nautilus, that corresponds with a similar 
hole made in the side of the boat. By this double opening 
I get into the small vessel. They shut the one belonging 
to the Nautilus, I shut the other by means of screw pres- 
sure. I undo the bolts, and the little boat goes up to the 
surface of the sea with prodigious rapidity. I then open 
the panel of the bridge, carefully shut till then; I mast it, 
hoist my sail, take my oars, and I'm off.** 

" But how do you get back on board?" 

" I do not come back, M. Aronnax; the Nautilus comes 
to me." 

" By your orders?" 

" By my orders. An electric thread connects us. I 
telegraph to it, and that is enough." 

"Eeally," I said, astonished at these marvels, "nothing 
oan be more simple." 

After having passed by the cage of the staircase that 
led to the platform, I saw a cabin six feet long, in which 
Conseil and Ned Land, enchanted with their repast, were 
devouring it with avidity. Then a door opened into a 
kitchen nine feet long, situated between the large store- 
rooms. There electricity, better "than gas itself, did all 
the cooking. The streams under the furnaces gave out 
to the sponges of platina a heat which was regularly kept 
up and distributed. They also heated a distilling ap- 
paratus, which, by evaporation, furnished excellent drink- 
able water. Near this kitchen was a bath-room comfort- 
ably furnished, with hot and cold water taps. 

Next to the kitchen was the berth-room of the vessel, 
sixteen feet long. But the door was shut, and I could 
not see the management of it, which might have given 



20,000 LEAGC7ES UNDER THE SEAS. G3 

me an idea of the number of men employed on board the 
Nautilus. 

At the bottom was a fourth partition, that separated 
this office from the engine-room. A door opened, and I 
found myself in the compartment where Captain Nemo 
certainly an engineer of a very high order had arranged 
his locomotive machinery. This engine-room, clearly 
lighted, did not measure less than sixty-five feet in length. 
It was divided into two parts; the first contained the 
materials for producing electricity, and the second the 
machinery that connected it with the screw. I examined 
it with great interest, in order to understand the machinery 
of the Nautilus. 

" You see," said the captain, "I use Bunsen's contri- 
vances, not Kuhmkorff's. Those would not have been 
powerful enough. Bunsen's are fewer in number, but 
strong and large, which experience proves to be the best. 
The electricity produced passes forward, where it works, 
by electro-magnets of great size, on a system of levers and 
cog-wheels that transmit the movement to the axle of the 
screw. This one, the diameter of which is nineteen feet, 
and the thread twenty -three feet, performs about a hundred 
and twenty revolutions in a second." 

"And you get then?" 

" A speed of fifty miles an hour." 

" I have seen the Nautilus maneuver before the Abra- 
ham Lincoln, and I have my own ideas as to its speed. But 
this is not enough. We must see where we go. We must 
be able to direct it to the right, to the left, above, below. 
How do you get to the great depths, where you find an 
increasing resistance, which is rated by hundreds of at- 
mospheres? How do you return to the surface of the 
ocean? And how do you maintain yourselves in the re- 
quisite medium? Am I asking too much?" 

" Not at all, Professor," replied the captain, with some 
hesitation; "since you may never leave this submarine 
boat. Come into the saloon, it is our usual study, and 
there you will learn all you want to know about the 
Nautilus." 



6i 20,000 LEAGUES UJS'DJilt THE SEAS. 



